3050: Use grazing to maintain or restore disturbance: freshwater marshes
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Key Messages:

Five studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of using grazing to maintain or restore disturbance in freshwater marshes. Two studies were in the UK. There was one study in each of the Netherlands, Germany and the USA.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community types (2 studies): One study of a riparian wet meadow in Germany reported changes in the area of plant community types over four years of grazing (after cutting trees/shrubs). One replicated, before-and-after study of dune slacks in the UK reported that the plant community type within plots remained stable over 16 years of grazing.
Community composition (3 studies): Two replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, studies in freshwater marshes/wet meadows in the UK and the USA reported that the overall plant community composition was similar in grazed and ungrazed plots after 2–9 years. One replicated study of dune slacks in the Netherlands simply reported changes in the overall plant community composition after resuming grazing (along with other interventions).
Overall richness/diversity (4 studies): Two studies (one replicated, before-and-after) in wetlands in Germany and the UK reported that after resuming grazing (and cutting trees/shrubs in one study), there were increases in total plant species richness and/or diversity. One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in the UK reported that grazing had no significant effect on overall plant species richness in wet grassland and flush vegetation: there were similar declines over nine years in grazed and ungrazed plots. One replicated study of dune slacks in the Netherlands simply quantified total plant species richness over three years after resuming grazing (along with other interventions).
Characteristic plant richness/diversity (2 studies): One replicated, before-and-after study in dune slacks in the UK reported that after resuming grazing, the number of dune-slack indicator species increased. One replicated study of dune slacks in the Netherlands simply quantified the richness of characteristic plant species – typical of dune slacks or nutrient-rich marshes – over three years after resuming grazing (along with other interventions).

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in freshwater marshes/wet meadows in the USA found that grazing typically had no significant effect on overall vegetation biomass after 1–2 years. One replicated study of dune slacks in the Netherlands simply quantified total vegetation cover over three years after resuming grazing (along with other interventions). Cover never exceeded 50%.
Herb abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in the UK reported that grazing had no significant effect on the cover of forbs or grass-like plants in wet grassland and flush vegetation: there were similar declines over nine years in grazed and ungrazed plots.
Tree/shrub abundance (1 study): One study of a riparian wet meadow in Germany reported that some trees/shrubs regrew over four years of grazing (after cutting trees/shrubs).
Bryophyte abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in the UK reported that grazing had no significant effect on bryophyte cover in wet grassland and flush vegetation: there were similar changes over nine years in grazed and ungrazed plots.
Individual species abundance (1 study): One replicated study of dune slacks in the Netherlands simply quantified the cover of individual species present over three years after resuming grazing (along with other interventions). Only two species had &gt;1% cover in any slack.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (2 studies): One site comparison study of a riparian wet meadow in Germany reported that an area grazed by cattle (after cutting trees/shrubs) contained shorter vegetation than an adjacent unmanaged area. One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in wet grassland and flush vegetation in the UK found that the maximum vegetation height was typically similar, over four years, in plots grazed by cattle and plots from which cattle were excluded.

OTHER

Survival (1 study): One study of a riparian wet meadow in Germany reported that 20% of black alder Alder glutinosa trees were still alive after being cut back and grazed for four years.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
