3035: Facilitate tidal exchange to restore degraded brackish/salt marshes
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Key Messages:

Seven studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of facilitating tidal exchange to restore degraded brackish/salt marshes. Six studies were in the USA. One study included sites in both the USA and Canada.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall extent (1 study): One before-and-after study in the USA reported that over 10 years after improving tidal exchange in a degraded marsh, the area of salt marsh vegetation increased – but not quite to historical, pre-degradation levels.
Community types (1 study): One before-and-after study in the USA reported that 3–10 years after improving tidal exchange in a degraded marsh, the area of salt marsh community types differed from historical, pre-degradation levels.
Community composition (3 studies): Three before-and-after studies in the USA found that in the four years after improving tidal exchange in degraded brackish/salt marshes, the overall plant community composition significantly differed to that present before intervention. However, in one of the studies this was only true in one of two marshes (the most degraded before intervention). One of the studies also reported that the overall plant community composition became more similar to adjacent natural brackish/salt marshes over two growing seasons after intervention.
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, before-and-after, site comparison study in the USA/Canada found that overall plant species richness was similar in ≥3-year-old tidally restored salt marshes and nearby natural salt marshes. However, there was also no significant difference between degraded marshes (before tidal restoration) and the natural marshes.
Characteristic plant richness/diversity (1 study): One study of a coastal marsh in the USA reported that over three years after restoring tidal exchange (along with a prescribed burn), the number of salt-tolerant plant species increased, whilst the number of freshwater plant species decreased.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study of salt marshes in the USA found that tidally restored areas had a lower overall plant stem density, after 13–54 years, than natural salt marshes.
Characteristic plant abundance (2 studies): Two before-and-after studies of coastal marshes in North America reported that within three years of restoring tidal exchange (sometimes along with other interventions), total cover of fresh/brackish plant species decreased. In one study the total cover of salt-tolerant plant species increased, but in the other study it did not. One of the studies also found that tidally restored marshes had lower cover of salt-tolerant plants than nearby natural marshes.
Individual species abundance (5 studies): Five studies quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. All five studies were in brackish/salt marshes in the USA. Three before-and-after studies reported increases in cover or frequency of smooth cordgrass Spartina alterniflora in the four years after improving tidal exchange. One replicated, site comparison study found that smooth cordgrass cover was lower in tidally restored areas than in natural salt marshes, 13–54 years after tidal restoration. Two before-and-after studies reported no clear change in frequency or cover of saltmeadow cordgrass Spartina patens in the four years after improving tidal exchange, but one before-and-after study reported an increase in saltmeadow cordgrass cover over two growing seasons after improving tidal exchange. Four studies reported declines in cover or frequency of less salt-tolerant species such as common reed Phragmites australis and cattails Typha spp. in the four years after improving tidal exchange (sometimes along with other interventions). One replicated, site comparison study found that common reed cover was similarly low (&lt;1%) in tidally restored areas and natural salt marshes, 13–54 years after tidal restoration.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Vegetation height (3 studies): Two before-and-after studies of brackish/salt marshes in the USA found that common reed was shorter 1–4 years after improving tidal exchange than before. One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that the maximum vegetation height was similar in tidally restored salt marshes and natural salt marshes, 13–54 years after tidal restoration.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
