2979: Change type of livestock grazing: brackish/salt marshes
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of allowing different types of livestock to graze brackish/salt marshes. There was overlap in the sites used in the studies, which all compared cattle and horse grazing on one salt marsh in the Netherlands.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community types (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study on a salt marsh in the Netherlands found that plots experienced similar changes in the area of a couch-grass-dominated community, over four years, whether grazed by cattle or horses.
Community composition (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study on a salt marsh in the Netherlands found that plots grazed by cattle and plots grazed by horses experienced a similar turnover of plant species over six years, and had a similar overall plant community composition after six years.
Overall richness/diversity (2 studies): Two replicated, randomized, paired, controlled studies on one salt marsh in the Netherlands found that plots grazed by cattle and plots grazed by horses had similar plant species richness after 1–6 years. One of the studies also reported similar increases in species richness over six years, whether plots were grazed by cattle or horses.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Individual species abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study on a salt marsh in the Netherlands3 found that plots grazed by cattle and plots grazed by horses experienced similar changes in the cover of two salt marsh herb species, over six years.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (2 studies): Of two replicated, paired, controlled studies on one salt marsh in the Netherlands, one found that horses maintained shorter late-summer vegetation than cattle after two years of grazing. The other study found that horses and cattle maintained late-summer vegetation of a similar height, over four years. The first study also examined variation in height between vegetation patches, and found no significant difference between horse- and cattle-grazed plots.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
