3418: Apply herbicide before seeding/planting
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Many degraded grasslands have few species and are dominated by grasses. In order to restore species-rich grasslands, herbicide may be applied to kill any vegetation that is present. Sowing seeds of grassland species after application of herbicide may help grassland species colonise the site more effectively. However, herbicide residues may also affect the germination and establishment of sown species.
For studies that remove vegetation prior to sowing or planting using mechanical methods, see ‘Remove vegetation before seeding/planting’ or for burning, see ‘Burn vegetation before seeding/planting’.

Key Messages:

Four studies examined the effects of applying herbicide before seeding/planting on grassland vegetation. Two studies were in the USA and one study was in each of Germany and the UK.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY (1 STUDY)

Sown/planted species richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the UK found that applying herbicide before sowing seeds increased sown species richness.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE (2 STUDIES)

Sown/planted species abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in the USA found that spraying with herbicide before sowing seeds increased the cover of sown grass species.
Forb abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in the USA found that spraying with herbicide before sowing grass seeds did not alter or reduced the density of native forb species.
Tree/shrub abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in the USA found that spraying with herbicide before sowing grass seeds led to an increase in the density of shrubs.
Individual plant species abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in the USA found that spraying with herbicide before sowing grass seeds did not alter the density of crested wheatgrass.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (1 STUDY)

Germination/Emergence (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in Germany found that spraying with herbicide before sowing seeds increased seedling emergence for five of eight wildflower species.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Grassland Conservation
Description: Grassland Synopsis
