3415: Remove topsoil or turf before seeding/planting
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Conversion of grasslands to arable agriculture or pasture often leads to soils with high nutrient content. These high nutrient content soils promote the growth of grass species which can outcompete forb species. In addition, these soils may contain seeds of undesirable plants (e.g. crop seeds). Removing topsoil may help to reduce soil nutrient content as well as eliminating the seeds of undesirable species. Sowing seeds after the removal of topsoil may aid colonisation by grassland plants.
The studies detailed in this intervention are direct tests of the effectiveness of removing topsoil/turf before seeding or planting (e.g. by comparison with a seeded or planted plot with topsoil/turf left in place). Studies that represent comparisons of seeding to unseeded plots can be found in the actions ‘Sow grass seeds’, ‘Sow grassland forb species’ or ‘Sow native grass and forbs’.

Key Messages:

Six studies examined the effects of removing topsoil or turf before seeding/planting on grassland vegetation. Three studies were in the UK, two studies were in the USA and one was in France.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY (3 STUDIES)

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in France found that removing topsoil before sowing seeds increased plant community similarity to that of intact steppe.
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in France found that removing topsoil before sowing seeds increased plant species richness.
Sown/planted species richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the UK found that removing topsoil before sowing seeds increased the species richness of sown plants.
Grass richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the UK found that removing turf before sowing seeds increased grass species richness in most cases compared to disturbing the soil before sowing.
Forb richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the UK found that removing turf before sowing seeds increased forb species richness in most cases compared to disturbing the soil before sowing.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE (2 STUDIES)

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in France found that removing topsoil before sowing seeds did not alter overall vegetation cover.
Sown/planted species abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in the UK found that removing topsoil before planting seedlings led to higher cover of planted species.
Individual species abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in the UK found that removing topsoil before planting seedlings led to lower cover of common knapweed.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (2 STUDIES)

Survival (2 studies): Two replicated, controlled studies (one paired and one randomized) in the USA found that removing topsoil before planting California oatgrass or sowing and planting purple needlegrass increased the survival of seedlings and plants.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Grassland Conservation
Description: Grassland Synopsis
