2246: Translocate habitat-forming (biogenic) species  - Translocate reef-forming corals
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Marine biogenic habitats are habitats created by the occurrence of a suite of specific marine species that form a new complex environment for other species to live in, and which can locally promote subtidal benthic invertebrate biodiversity. Such habitats include coral reefs, oyster reefs, mussel beds, and kelp forests (Jones et al. 1994). Restoring these habitats where they have been either degraded or lost can be achieved by translocating new individuals of the biogenic species naturally occurring elsewhere, for instance from another healthy non-degraded site (Fariñas-Franco & Roberts 2014; Hughes et al. 2008). This technique can also be used to create new biogenic habitats where they do not naturally occur (Nelson et al. 2004).
Note that here, data on associated invertebrates are reported, but not on the translocated species itself, which are reported in “Species management – Translocate species”. However, as the outcomes of translocating biogenic species can vary largely with the species and habitat that they form, studies have been grouped by habitat and/or wider taxonomic group (e.g: reefs or beds formed by molluscs such as oysters, mussels, snails; meadows made by seagrass; forests made by kelp; or reefs made by corals). Evidence from transplantation studies from hatchery-reared biogenic species are summarised under “Habitat restoration and creation – Transplant habitat-forming (biogenic) species” and under “Species management – Transplant/release captive-bred or hatchery-reared species”.
 
Fariñas-Franco J.M. & Roberts D. (2014) Early faunal successional patterns in artificial reefs used for restoration of impacted biogenic habitats. Hydrobiologia, 727,75–94. 
Hughes D.J., Poloczanska E.S. & Dodd J. (2008) Survivorship and tube growth of reef‐building Serpula vermicularis (Polychaeta: Serpulidae) in two Scottish sea lochs. Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems, 18, 117–129.
Jones C.G., Lawton J.H. & Shachak M. (1994) Organisms as ecosystem engineers. Pages 130–147 in: Ecosystem Management. Springer, New York, NY.
Nelson KA., Leonard L.A., Posey M.H., Alphin T.D. & Mallin M.A. (2004) Using transplanted oyster (Crassostrea virginica) beds to improve water quality in small tidal creeks: a pilot study. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology, 298, 347–368.

Key Messages:

Two studies examined the effects of translocating habitat-forming corals on associated subtidal benthic invertebrate populations. One was in Tayabas Bay (Philippines) and one in the South China Sea (Philippines).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Overall community composition (1 study): One replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in the South China Sea found that following coral translocation associated invertebrate communities did not change and remained similar to plots without translocated corals.
Overall richness/diversity (2 studies): One replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in the South China Sea found that following coral translocation richness of associated invertebrates increased but also increased in plots without corals, likely due to spill-over. One replicated, controlled study in Tayabas Bay found that richness of associated invertebrates was higher in plots with translocated corals than in plots without.

POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in the South China Sea found that following coral translocation abundance of associated invertebrates increased and became higher than in plots without translocated corals.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
