160: Ensure connectivity between habitat patches
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Habitat fragmentation, as well as destruction, may be an important driver of population declines. Small areas hold fewer species than large ones and if individuals are unable to cross areas of converted habitat then populations in separate habitat patches will become isolated. This potentially makes them more vulnerable to extinction, from natural variations in birth and death rates or sex ratios; from inbreeding depression and from outside pressures, both natural (such as storms or wildfires) and man-made (such as hunting or continued habitat loss), although the precise effects of habitat fragmentation, as opposed to loss, are debated (e.g. Fahrig 1997).
Theoretically, the number of species surviving in a habitat fragment is determined by its size and its effective distance to other habitat patches (MacArthur & Wilson 1967). Connecting remaining areas of habitat is therefore often seen as a way to increase the viability of populations, but there is considerable debate as to the effectiveness of such ‘wildlife corridors’ (e.g. Beier & Noss 1998).
Studies describing the effects of creating habitat corridors, rather than retaining them are described in ‘Habitat restoration and creation’. Beier, P. & Noss, R.F. (1998) Do habitat corridors provide connectivity? Conservation Biology, 12, 1241–1252.
Fahrig, L. (1997) Relative Effects of Habitat Loss and Fragmentation on Population Extinction. The Journal of Wildlife Management, 61, 603–610.
MacArthur, R.H. (1967) The Theory of Island Biogeography. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.

Key Messages:

A replicated, controlled study in Canada found significantly higher abundances of some birds, but not forest specialists, in forest patches connected to a continuous area of forest, than in isolated patches.
Another study of the same system found evidence that corridors were used by some bird species more than clearcuts between patches, although corridors near cut forest were not used more than those near uncut stands.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Bird Conservation
Description: Bird Synopsis
