3798: Relocate nests/eggs for artificial incubation: Lizards
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Relocating eggs to artificially incubate them may be used as a way to maximise hatching success as the eggs will no longer be vulnerable to natural threats such as predation. Consideration must be given to the potential impacts of incubation conditions (for example temperature and humidity) on the sex, size, shape, colour, behaviour, movement ability and post-hatching growth of reptile hatchlings (Warner & Andrews 2002, Booth et al. 2006).
This action includes studies where eggs are incubated in artificial conditions, which ranges from controlled laboratory settings to using polystyrene boxes to incubate eggs in buildings. Studies are also included where gravid females are brought into captivity to lay eggs, but eggs are taken away from the females for artificial incubation.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians. See here for: Sea turtles; Tortoises, terrapins, side-necked & softshell turtles; Snakes; Crocodilians or Tuatara.
For studies that discuss the effects of relocating and re-burying eggs in natural habitats to avoid threats, see Relocate nests/eggs to a hatchery and Relocate nests/eggs to nearby natural setting (not including hatcheries).
See also Maintain wild-caught, gravid females in captivity during gestation and Alter incubation temperatures to achieve optimal/desired sex ratio.
Booth D.T. (2006) Influence of incubation temperature on hatchling phenotype in reptiles. Physiological and Biochemical Zoology, 79, 274–281.
Warner D.A. & Andrews R.M. (2002) Laboratory and field experiments identify sources of variation in phenotypes and survival of hatchling lizards. Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 76, 105–124.

Key Messages:

Fifteen studies evaluated the effects of relocating nests/eggs for artificial incubation on lizard populations. Five studies were in China, two were in each of India, Spain, the USA and New Zealand and one was in each of Namibia and Taiwan.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (15 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (12 studies): One replicated, controlled study in Namibia found that artificially incubated white-throated savanna monitor eggs had higher hatching success than eggs in natural nests. Three of four studies (including one replicated, controlled study) in the USA, Spain, Taiwan and China reported hatching success of 56–96% for artificially incubated eggs from wild lizards. The other study reported that hatching success varied between 11–76%. One replicated, randomized study in India found that hatching success of artificially incubated garden lizard eggs was lower for eggs incubated in cotton wool compared to those incubated in soil or sand. One replicated study in the USA found that artificially incubated eastern collared lizard eggs that had been laid in captivity in artificial nests had higher hatching success than those laid outside of the artificial nests. Two of five replicated studies (including one randomized, controlled study) in India, Spain and China found that hatching success of artificially incubated lizard eggs was lower at higher incubation temperatures. Two studies found that hatching success was similar across all incubation temperatures. The other study found that hatching success was not affected by temperature fluctuations during artificial incubation.
Survival (2 studies): One replicated, randomized study in New Zealand found that survival of artificially incubated lizards was higher for individuals incubated at higher temperatures. One replicated, randomized study in Spain found that survival of artificially incubated common chameleon hatchlings was affected by incubation temperature but not moisture levels.
Condition (7 studies): Three of five replicated studies (including three randomized studies) in Spain, New Zealand and China found that the size or morphology of artificially incubated lizard hatchlings was similar across all incubation temperatures or was not affected by temperature fluctuations. One study found that growth of artificially incubated common chameleon hatchlings was lower for individuals incubated at higher temperatures. The other study found that lizards from eggs incubated at higher temperatures had higher sprint speeds than those incubated at lower temperatures. One replicated, controlled study in Namibia reported that white-throated savanna monitors from artificially incubated eggs were similar in size to hatchlings from natural nests. One replicated, randomized study in India found that artificially incubating garden lizard eggs in cotton wool, soil or sand resulted in similar sized hatchlings.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
