3669: Restore or maintain beaches (‘beach nourishment’)
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Building soft structures (‘beach nourishment’) such as sand dunes, or filling in eroded beaches with replacement sand may counteract coastal erosion, increase resilience to storms and protect wildlife (Nordstrom et al. 2000, Klein et al. 2001). Nourished beaches may also provide nesting sites for sea turtles and so the construction process and the type of fill should be carefully considered to as to maintain the natural beach erosion cycle and provide suitable habitat (e.g. Speybroeck et al. 2006).
Nordstrom K.F., Lampe R. & Vandemark L.M. (2000) Re-establishing naturally functioning dunes on developed coasts. Environmental Management, 25, 37–51.
Klein R.J., Nicholls R.J., Ragoonaden S., Capobianco M., Aston J. & Buckley E.N. (2001) Technological options for adaptation to climate change in coastal zones. Journal of Coastal Research, 17, 531–543.
Speybroeck J., Bonte D., Courtens W., Gheskiere T., Grootaert P., Maelfait J.P., Mathys M., Provoost S., Sabbe K., Stienen E.W.M., Van Lancker V., Vincx M. & Segraer S. (2006) Beach nourishment: an ecologically sound coastal defence alternative? A review. Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems, 16, 419–435.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects of restoring or maintaining beaches on reptile populations. All three studies were in the USA.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that gopher tortoise densities were higher and numbers occupying burrows similar on constructed sand dunes compared to natural dunes.
Reproductive success (2 studies): Two controlled, before-and-after studies in the USA found that one year after adding sand to beaches, nesting activity decreased more for loggerhead turtles, and loggerhead and green turtles compared to on unmodified beaches. Two years after nourishment, both studies found that loggerhead nesting activity had increased, and in one study nesting had returned to pre-nourishment levels.

BEHAVIOUR (2 STUDIES)

Use (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that burrows on a constructed dune were discovered by gopher tortoises after three months.
Behaviour change (1 study): One controlled, before-and-after study in the USA found that one year after adding sand to beaches, loggerhead turtles made more non-nesting crawls than on unmodified beaches, but the difference was smaller two years after nourishment.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
