1791: Drain/replace acidic water
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Peatlands can hold onto acidic water, especially in thick carpets of moss. This is a natural process in the development of peatlands from fens to bogs (Rydin & Jeglum 2013). However, where the desired plant community is a fen, intervention may be needed to reduce acidity. Fen plants prefer weakly acidic, neutral or even alkaline peat (approximately pH 6–8, similar to saliva, tap water or sea water). Ditches can be dug to drain excess surface water (especially during periods of heavy rain). This may be replaced by less acidic water naturally, or with further intervention.
Caution: Peatland vegetation is very sensitive to water quantity and quality (Rydin & Jeglum 2013). If acidic water is drained, it will probably have to be replaced to prevent the peatland drying out. The chemistry of this water should be carefully monitored or controlled to avoid changing the chemical conditions of the peatland. This intervention is generally not applicable to bogs, which are naturally acidic.
Related actions: remove plants, including mosses that can store acidic water; divert/replace other sources of polluted water.
Rydin H. & Jeglum J.K. (2013) The Biology of Peatlands, Second Edition. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects on peatland vegetation of draining/replacing acidic surface water. Both studies were in fens.
Vegetation cover (2 studies): Two controlled studies in fens in the Netherlands reported that draining acidic water had mixed effects on cover of Sphagnum moss and herbs after 4–5 years, depending on the species and whether moss was also removed.
Overall plant richness/diversity (1 study): One controlled, before-and-after study in a fen in the Netherlands reported that draining and replacing acidic water increased plant species richness.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
