3235: Deposit soil/sediment to form physical structure of freshwater marshes
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
This intervention involves large-scale deposition of soil or sediment to form the physical structure of a marsh. This can be a cost-effective alternative to depositing sediment in upland areas or in the ocean (LaSalle et al. 1991). Soil or sediment could be placed directly where a marsh is desired, or placed nearby then carried to the desired site by water flows (Foster et al. 2013). Summarized studies could vary in the degree of landscaping of the newly deposited sediment.
Related actions: Deposit soil/sediment and introduce vegetation; Add sediment in relatively small amounts; Add upland topsoil; Transplant or replace wetland soil in order to introduce marsh vegetation.
Foster N.M., Hudson M.D., Bray S. & Nicholls R.J. (2013) Intertidal mudflat and saltmarsh conservation and sustainable use in the UK: a review. Journal of Environmental Management, 126, 96–104.
LaSalle M.W., Landin M.C. & Sims J.G. (1991) Evaluation of the flora and fauna of a Spartina alterniflora marsh established on dredged material in Winyah Bay, South Carolina. Wetlands, 11, 191–208.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of depositing soil/sediment to form the physical structure of freshwater marshes (without introducing vegetation). One study was in the USA and one was in the Netherlands.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community types (1 study): One replicated, paired, site comparison study in the Netherlands reported that marshes created by depositing sand at lake margins contained fewer plant community types, after 8–16 years, than mature natural marshes.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (2 studies): One site comparison study in the USA reported that plant stem density was similar, after 4–10 years, in marshes created by depositing sediment and in natural marshes, but that vegetation cover was lower in the created marshes. One replicated, paired, site comparison study in the Netherlands reported that marshes created by depositing sand at lake margins contained similar vegetation biomass to nearby natural marshes after 8–16 years.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (1 study): One site comparison study in the USA reported that a freshwater marsh created by depositing sediment contained vegetation of a similar height to nearby natural marshes after 4–10 years.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
