1475: Regularly de-activate/remove ground snares 
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Some primate species, especially larger and more terrestrial species, such as gorillas Gorilla spp. and chimpanzees Pan troglodytes, may be injured by getting caught in snares typically set out to catch animals such as duikers Cephalophus spp. and bush pigs Potamochoerus larvatus. These primate species can get their hands or feet trapped in snares while travelling through the forest, often resulting in life threatening injuries and even death. This intervention involves the regular patrolling of teams to de-activate/remove ground snares.
            The patrolling of areas by anti-poaching teams to reduce hunting is discussed separately under ‘Conduct regular anti-poaching patrols’, and the providing of training and equipment to anti-poaching patrols is discussed under ‘Provide training to anti-poaching ranger patrols’, and ‘Provide better equipment (e.g. guns) to anti-poaching ranger patrols’, respectively. The use of monitoring surveillance strategies and/or monitoring data to improve effectiveness of wildlife law enforcement patrols is discussed under ‘Implement monitoring surveillance strategies (e.g. SMART)/use monitoring data to improve effectiveness of wildlife law enforcement patrols’.

Key Messages:

One before-and-after study in the Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda found that mountain gorilla numbers increased over five years in an area that was patrolled for snares, alongside other interventions.
One before-and-after study in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Rwanda and Uganda found that a mountain gorilla population declined in an area where snares were removed regularly, alongside other interventions.
One before-and-after study in Ghana found that the number of snares declined in an area where they were regularly removed, alongside other interventions.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Primate Conservation
Description: Primate Synopsis
