3045: Cut/mow herbaceous plants to maintain or restore disturbance: brackish/salt marshes
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Disturbance can clear dominant plants, maintain light availability and control nutrient levels – and may maintain vegetation in a desirable and/or species-rich state (Hall et al. 2008; Middleton 2013). Therefore, conservationists sometimes want to actively restore disturbance where it has ceased, or maintain disturbance at a site where it would otherwise be lost. Mowing or cutting is one way to do this. This action includes machine mowing, hand clipping, strimming and scything of herbs or small shrubs, or swards of vegetation containing these types of plants.
Cutting itself may be the historic or traditional disturbance that maintains vegetation in a desirable state. For example, in Mexico’s Central Altiplano region, people have harvested marsh vegetation for millennia. Cattails and bulrushes are cut for crafts, construction, animal feed and fertilizer. This allows subordinate marsh plant species to persist (Hall et al. 2008). However, cutting activities may slow or cease as demand for the cut vegetation declines, skills are lost, or cheap imports reduce the economic viability of cutting (Clover 2002).
This action includes evidence for all forms of cutting/mowing in historically disturbed marshes, but bear in mind that the effects might be highly dependent on how the cutting/mowing is carried out (e.g. extent, timing, frequency and duration) and site conditions (e.g. nutrient availability and water levels) (Rolletschek et al. 2000; Russell & Kraaij 2008; Fogli et al. 2014).
Related actions: Use cutting/mowing to control problematic herbaceous plants, whose success is not linked to a change in disturbance regime; Cut large trees/shrubs to maintain or restore disturbance; Reduce frequency of cutting/mowing; Reduce intensity of cutting/mowing; Change season/timing of cutting/mowing.
Clover C. (2002) Grim reaper hangs over reed-cutting industry. Available at http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/1411568/Grim-reaper-hangs-over-reed-cutting-industry.html. Accessed 4 September 2019.
Fogli S., Brancaleoni L., Lambertini C. & Gerdol R. (2014) Mowing regime has different effects on reed stands in relation to habitat. Journal of Environmental Management, 134, 56–62.
Hall S.J., Lindig-Cisneros R. & Zedler J.B. (2008) Does harvesting sustain plant diversity in Central Mexican wetlands? Wetlands, 28, 776–792.
Middleton B.A. (2013) Rediscovering traditional vegetation management in preserves: trading experiences between cultures and continents. Biological Conservation, 158, 750–760.
Rolletschek H., Rolletschek A., Hartzendorf T. & Kohl J. (2000) Physiological consequences of mowing and burning of Phragmites australis stands for rhizome ventilation and amino acid metabolism. Wetlands Ecology and Management, 8, 425–433.
Russell I.A. & Kraaij T. (2008) Effects of cutting Phragmites australis along an inundation gradient, with implications for managing reed encroachment in a South African estuarine lake system. Wetlands Ecology and Management, 16, 383–393.

Key Messages:

Six studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of cutting/mowing to maintain or restore disturbance in brackish/salt marshes. Two studies were in France. There was one study in each of the USA, Denmark, South Africa and Estonia.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled, before-and-after study in brackish wet grasslands in Estonia found that annual cutting affected overall plant community composition, with significant differences between cut and uncut plots after four years.
Overall richness/diversity (3 studies): Two replicated, site comparison studies in France found that cut and uncut reedbeds had similar overall plant species richness. One replicated, randomized, controlled, before-and-after study in brackish wet grasslands in Estonia found that cut and uncut plots typically had similar plant species richness and diversity over four years.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in France found that cut and uncut reedbeds had similar cover of plants other than common reed Phragmites australis.
Individual species abundance (5 studies): Five studies quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. For example, two replicated, randomized, controlled, before-and-after studies in brackish marshes or grasslands in South Africa and Estonia found that cutting had mixed effects on the abundance of common reed Phragmites australis after 1–4 years, depending on the water level of the plots. One site comparison study in Denmark found that a fresh/brackish reedbed cut two years previously contained fewer “tall” common reed stems than a reedbed cut seven years previously. Two replicated, site comparison studies in France found that cut reedbeds contained a similar number (and, in one study, biomass) of live reed stems than uncut reedbeds, but far fewer dead stems.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (4 studies): Two controlled studies (one also replicated, randomized, before-and-after) in brackish marshes in the USA and South Africa reported that rushes or reeds were shorter in cut plots than in uncut plots, for up to one year after cutting. Two replicated, site comparison studies in France found that live reed stems were a similar height in cut and uncut reedbeds.
Diameter/perimeter/area (3 studies): Two site comparison studies (one replicated) in fresh/brackish reedbeds in Denmark and France found that common reed Phragmites australis stems were a similar diameter in cut and uncut reedbeds. One replicated, randomized, controlled, before-and-after study in a brackish marsh in South Africa found that cutting reduced the diameter of common reed stems present one year later.
Basal area (1 study): One site comparison study in a fresh/brackish marsh in Denmark found that the basal area of common reed Phragmites australis stems was smaller in a reedbed cut two years previously than in a reedbed cut seven years previously. Only “tall” stems were sampled.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
