2727: Fit mesh escape panels/windows and a size-sorting grid (rigid or flexible) to a trawl net
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Trawling is a method of fishing that involves pulling a fishing net (trawl) through the water behind one or more vessels. Trawls may be fitted with devices to allow unwanted catch to escape (often termed “bycatch reduction devices”). A variety of unwanted catch reduction devices have been developed aiming to enable specific sizes or groups of unwanted fish to escape the trawl net. These include rigid or flexible size-sorting or excluder grids, and also large square-, or diamond-mesh panels, fitted into the codend of a trawl net (Sinclair & Valdimarsson 2003). Positioning of both types of devices as well as opening size, mesh size or bar spacing and orientation can affect the type and sizes at which fish can escape.
Evidence for the individual effects of mesh escape panels/windows and size-sorting escape grids in trawl nets is summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification - Fit mesh escape panels/windows to a trawl net’, ‘Fit a size-sorting escape grid (rigid or flexible) to a fish trawl net’ and ‘Fit a size-sorting escape grid (rigid or flexible) to a prawn/shrimp trawl net’. Similar interventions of various combinations of unwanted catch reduction devices, including mesh panels/windows and escape grids, are summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification’.
Valdemarsen J.W., Suuronen P. 2003. Modifying Fishing Gear to Achieve Ecosystem Objectives. In Responsible Fisheries in the Marine Ecosystem. Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United States & CABI Publishing, 426 pp.

Key Messages:

Six studies examined the effects of fitting trawl nets with mesh escape panels or windows and a size-sorting grid on marine fish populations. Two studies were in the Atlantic Ocean (Portugal, Suriname), two were in the Indian Ocean (Australia, Mozambique), one study was in the Gulf of Carpentaria (Australia) and one was in the English Channel (UK). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (6 STUDIES)

Reduce unwanted catch (5 studies): Four of five replicated studies (four paired, controlled) in the Gulf of Carpentaria, Indian Ocean and Atlantic Ocean, found that bottom trawl nets fitted with square mesh escape panels and size-sorting grids of various types reduced the unwanted catch (non-target or undersized) of fish, sharks and stingrays, rays and total discarded catch (fish and invertebrates), compared to standard unmodified trawl nets, and that fish escape through either the panel/window, grid, or both varied between fish species or sizes. The other study found that the escape of non-target fish from the combined use of a square mesh panel and grid depended on the position of the panel in the net.
Improved size-selectivity of fishing gear (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in the English Channel found that size-selectivity of whiting was increased in bottom trawl nets fitted with square mesh escape panels or cylinders in combination with one or two size-sorting grids of different types, compared to standard nets.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
