3718: Add woody debris to landscapes
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Reptile species use both fine and coarse woody debris (sometimes called downed wood) as shelter habitat. In landscapes where debris has been removed, adding debris back may improve conservation outcomes (Bunnell & Houde 2010).
For studies discussing leaving woody debris and snags in place after logging or wood harvesting, see Threat: Biological resource use – Leave standing/deadwood snags in forests and Leave woody debris in forests after logging. For other studies that discuss providing shelter habitat, see Create artificial refuges, hibernacula and aestivation sites, and Create artificial burrows.
Bunnell F.L. & Houde I. (2010) Down wood and biodiversity—implications to forest practices. Environmental Reviews, 18, 397–421.

Key Messages:

Six studies evaluated the effects of adding woody debris to landscapes on reptile populations. Three studies were in Australia, two were in the USA and one was in Indonesia.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Richness/diversity (5 studies): Four of five studies (including four replicated, randomized, controlled studies) in the USA, Indonesia and Australia found that areas with added woody debris had similar richness and diversity or richness or of reptiles, rare reptiles and snakes and lizards compared to areas with no added debris. The other study found that areas with added woody debris had higher reptile species richness than areas with no added debris.

POPULATION RESPONSE (6 STUDIES)

Abundance (6 studies): Two of six replicated studies (including four randomized, controlled studies) in Australia, Indonesia and the USA found that areas with added woody debris had a higher abundance of reptiles than areas with no added debris. Three studies found that areas with woody debris had a similar abundance of reptiles and snakes and lizards compared to areas with no added debris. The other study found that pastures with added timber had lower abundance of rare reptile species compared to pastures without timber, but that in pastures with added timber, reptile abundance was higher after 15 months than after 12 months.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
