3314: Add surface mulch before/after planting trees/shrubs: freshwater wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Organic mulches (i.e. remains or waste products of living organisms) can be placed on the surface of wetlands to stabilize temperatures and humidity, and provide shade to germinating plants. This may create a more hospitable environment for establishment and growth of planted vegetation. Examples of substances than can be used as mulches include compost, straw, seagrass leaves and seaweed (macroalgae).
Caution: It may be necessary to sterilize mulch before applying it, with heat or radiation, to kill propagules of undesirable plants. Adding organic matter as a mulch may be less labour intensive than mixing it into the soil or sediment, but increases the risk of the material being washed away.
Related actions: Add surface mulch, other than to complement planting; Add cover other than mulch to complement planting.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of mulching freshwater wetlands planted with trees/shrubs. The study was in Australia.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Tree/shrub abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in floodplain swamps in Australia found that mulching with woodchips before planting native shrubs had no significant effect on their overall cover, one year later.
Individual species abundance (1 study): The same study found that mulching with woodchips before planting swamp gum Eucalyptus camphora seedlings had no significant effect on swamp gum cover, one year later. Mulching reduced cover of the problematic herb species in one of two swamps, but had no significant effect in the other.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in floodplain swamps in Australia found that planted swamp gum Eucalyptus camphora seedlings reached a similar height, after one year, in mulched and unmulched plots.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
