482: Provide artificial nesting sites for wildfowl
Effectiveness rating: Beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Wildfowl nest both in trees (e.g. wood ducks Aix sponsa and goldeneyes Bucephala spp.) and on the ground (e.g. dabbling ducks Anas spp.). These different strategies require very different interventions if conservationists are to provide nesting sites. We have therefore split studies describing the provision of artificial islands and floating rafts for wildfowl (described in the next section) from those describing the provision of nest boxes and other artificial nests.
One study, Divoky & Suydam (1995), describes the use of a nesting shelter for ground-nesting common eiders Somateria mollissima, and is included in this section as it is providing a shelter, rather than nesting substrate.
Divoky, G.J. & Suydam, R. (1995) An artificial nest site for arctic nesting common eiders. Journal of Field Ornithology, 66, 270–276.
 

Key Messages:

Six studies from North America and Europe found that wildfowl populations increased with the provision of artificial nests, although one study from Finland found that there was no increase in the number of broods or chicks in areas with nest boxes.
Twelve studies from North America investigated the success of nests in artificial nests with nine finding that success and productivity was high, sometimes higher than or similar to natural nests. Two studies found that success for some species in nest boxes was lower than for natural nests. Two studies investigated the impact of nest box location, finding that hidden nests had higher success and that nests over water were more successful than those in trees over land.
Nineteen studies from across the world investigated occupancy rates of artificial nests, finding that rates varied from no use of 25 nest boxes in a single site in Indonesia to 100% occupancy across 20 sites in the USA with one study finding that nest boxes were used more than natural cavities. Two studies found that occupancy rates increased over time, whilst four studies found that occupancy rates appeared to be affected by design or positioning.
Three studies from North America found that nest boxes could have other impacts on reproduction and behaviour, with common starlings Sturna vulgaris (a nest site competitor) avoiding some nest box designs; hidden nest boxes having lower intra-specific nest parasitism than easily visible boxes and female common eiders Somateria mollissima losing less weight over incubation if they were nesting in shelters, compared to birds nesting in the open, although they lost weight quicker after nesting.

 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Bird Conservation
Description: Bird Synopsis
