1770: Use cutting/mowing to control problematic herbaceous plants
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Cutting or mowing is the removal of above-ground parts of herbaceous plants or young trees/shrubs. Roots are left in place. Mowing and cutting can be broad tools affecting all plants in a community, so are often used to manage succession (development of plant communities over time). Cuttings may be removed from the site or left in place to rot down. Note that this choice will affect nutrients, temperature and light within the peatland, in turn determining which plant species can grow (Weltzin et al. 2005).
Caution: Mowing with heavy machinery could damage the peatland surface and vegetation. Cutting by hand or with specialized vehicles might cause less damage.
Key peatland types where this action may be appropriate: bogs, fens/fen meadows, tropical peat swamps.
Related actions: cutting/mowing to control herbaceous plants as part of a traditional disturbance regime; remove plant litter as part of/to compensate for loss of a traditional disturbance regime; change season of cutting/mowing; use low impact vehicles or harvesting techniques.
Weltzin J.F., Keller J.K., Bridgham S.D., Pastor J., Allen P.B. & Chen J. (2005) Litter controls plant community composition in a northern fen. Oikos, 110, 537–546.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects on peatland vegetation of cutting/mowing problematic herbaceous plants. Three studies were in fens or fen meadows and one was in a bog. N.B. Cutting/mowing in historically disturbed peatlands is considered as a separate action.
Plant community composition (3 studies): Two replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after studies in rich fens in Sweden found that mowing typically had no significant effect on the overall plant community composition. One controlled study in a fen meadow in the UK reported that mown plots developed different plant communities to unmown plots.
Characteristic plants (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in a fen in Sweden found that mown plots contained more fen-characteristic plant species than unmown plots, although their cover did not differ significantly between treatments.
Vegetation cover (2 studies): Of two replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after studies in rich fens in Sweden, one found that mowing had no effect on vascular plant or bryophyte cover over five years. The other reported that mowing typically increased Sphagnum moss cover and reduced purple moor grass cover, but had mixed effects on cover of other plant species.
Growth (1 study): One replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in a bog in Estonia found that clipping competing vegetation did not affect Sphagnum moss growth.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
