2728: Use a different design or configuration of size-sorting escape grid/system in trawl fishing gear (bottom and mid-water)
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
In some trawl fisheries, the commercially targeted species are small (e.g. shrimp and prawn fisheries, but also fisheries for mixed fish species) and so the nets have small mesh sizes to help prevent commercial catch from passing through them and escaping. Whilst this might be effective for retaining target catch, unwanted species or sizes of fish are also unable to escape. To minimise the amount of unwanted catch, a grid device (an excluder or size-sorting grid) can be fitted to a trawl net that helps to stop unwanted fish from entering the codend (He & Balzano 2007, Sistiaga et al. 2011). However, the effectiveness of grids in any given fishery may largely depend on the body shape as well as size of the unwanted species and/or their escape behaviour (i.e. whether they tend to swim up or down to avoid the net). Using a different design or configuration of escape grid or system (such as two grids) may help to further reduce unwanted catch by tailoring the modifications to suit specific species or sizes of unwanted fish, for example if having horizontal or vertical grid bars, or two grids instead of one, increase the likelihood of escape.
Evidence for related interventions is summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification – Fit a size-sorting escape grid (rigid or flexible) to a fish trawl net’ and ‘Fit a size-sorting escape grid (rigid or flexible) to a prawn/shrimp trawl net’. Similar interventions of various combinations of unwanted catch reduction devices, including escape grids, are summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification’.
He P. & Balzano V. (2007) Reducing the catch of small shrimps in the Gulf of Maine pink shrimp fishery with a size-sorting grid device. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 64, 1551–1557.
Sistiaga M., Herrmann B., Nielsen K.N. & Larsen R. B. (2011) Understanding limits to cod and haddock separation using size selectivity in a multispecies trawl fishery: An application of FISHSELECT. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Science, 68, 927–940.

Key Messages:

Twenty-three studies examined the effects of using a different design or configuration of size-sorting escape grid/system in trawl fishing gear on marine fish populations. Ten studies were in the Atlantic Ocean (Canada, USA, Brazil, Spain, Norway). Five studies were in the Barents and/or Norwegian Sea (Norway). Two studies were in the Kattegat and Skagerrak (Denmark/Sweden). One study was in each of the Arafura Sea (Australia), the Greenland Sea (Norway), the North Sea (Norway), the North Pacific Ocean (USA) and the Indian Ocean (Australia). One study was in a laboratory (Japan). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (23 STUDIES)

Reduction of unwanted catch (17 studies): Six of 16 replicated studies (eight paired and controlled, three controlled, one randomized and controlled, and one paired) in the Atlantic Ocean, a laboratory, Arafura Sea, Barents Sea, Kattegat and Skagerrak, Greenland Sea, North Sea, Pacific Ocean and the Indian Ocean, and one controlled study in the Barents Sea found that using a different design or configuration of size-sorting escape grid/system in trawl nets reduced the unwanted (undersized, non-target, discarded) catches of all or most of the fish species assessed, compared to standard or other grid designs/configurations. Four studies found that the effect of using different escape grids on the reduction of unwanted catch varied with fish species, light conditions, and the type of trawl net used. The other six found that, overall, using a different escape grid did not reduce unwanted fish catch.
Improve size-selectivity of fishing gear (7 studies): Three of seven replicated studies (three controlled, one paired and controlled) in the Barents/Norwegian Sea, the Atlantic Ocean and the Greenland Sea found that different types or configurations of size-sorting escape grid systems in trawl nets resulted in better size-selectivity for unwanted redfish and Greenland halibut and of commercial target hake compared to other designs or configurations. Three studies found that the effect of using a different design or configuration of size-sorting escape grid/system on improving the size-selectivity of trawls varied between fish species compared to standard or other escape grid designs. The other study found that a new design of grid system did not improve the size-selectivity of unwanted redfish compared to an existing system.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
