2695: Use artificial light on fishing gear
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Many fishing gears incidentally capture unwanted non-commercially targeted species or sizes. Different species show different behavioural responses to light (Ryer & Olla 2000; Ryer & Barnett 2006; Walsh & Hickey 1993). Some may be attracted to the presence of lights, however, some may avoid them or they may enable some fish to see the fishing gear and move away from it. Fitting artificial lights (e.g. LEDs) to fishing gear during deployment may reduce the amount of unwanted species that interact with and are retained by fishing gear.
For a similar intervention relating to using fish deterrents on fishing gear, see ‘Fishing gear modification - Attach an electropositive deterrent to fishing gear’.
Ryer C.H. & Olla B.L. (2000) Avoidance of an approaching net by juvenile walleye pollock Theragra chalcogramma in the laboratory: the influence of light intensity. Fisheries Research, 45, 195–199.
Ryer C.H. & Barnett L.A. (2006) Influence of illumination and temperature upon flatfish reactivity and herding behavior: potential implications for trawl capture efficiency. Fisheries Research, 81, 242–250.
Walsh S.J. & Hickey W.M. (1993) Behavioural reactions of demersal fish to bottom trawls at various light conditions. ICES Marine Science Symposium, 196, 68–76.

Key Messages:

Two studies examined the effects of using artificial light on fishing gear on marine fish populations. One study was in the Pacific Ocean (USA) and one in the Barents Sea (Norway). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (2 STUDIES)

Reduction of unwanted catch (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in the Pacific Ocean found that shrimp trawl nets with artificial lights caught fewer unwanted fish when they were fitted to the fishing line, but not to a size-sorting grid, compared to a conventional trawl.
Improved size-selectivity of fishing gear (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the Barents Sea found that size-selectivity of long rough dab, Atlantic cod, haddock and redfish was not improved by the presence of LED lights on a size-sorting grid.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
