3216: Reprofile/relandscape: brackish/saline swamps
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This action involves large-scale reprofiling or landscaping, aiming to restore or create swamps. This includes excavating large basins (&gt;8 ha or &gt;280 m diameter), moving soil/sediment from the site into levees/berms/impoundments, removing unnatural hills or levees, filling in deep depressions and altering the elevation/slope of coastal areas. In other words, this intervention aims to restore wetland hydrology (how wet the soil is and when it is wet/flooded) by adjusting the ground surface relative to the water table or sea. Soil from existing marshes or swamps might be imported as part of relandscaping efforts, but we consider this as a separate action.
Caution: Heavy machinery is usually needed for this action. Heavy vehicles can churn and compress wetland soils (Campbell et al. 2002).
Related actions: Raise water level to restore degraded swamps; Raise water level to restore/create swamps from other land uses; Facilitate tidal exchange to restore degraded swamps; Facilitate tidal exchange to restore/create swamps from other land uses; Excavate pools; Create mounds or hollows; Remove surface soil/sediment; Deposit soil/sediment to form physical habitat structure; Reprofile/relandscape before planting.
Campbell D.A., Cole C.A. & Brooks R.P. (2002) A comparison of created and natural wetlands in Pennsylvania, USA. Wetlands Ecology and Management, 10, 41–49.

Key Messages:

Five studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of reprofiling/relandscaping to restore or create brackish/saline swamps. Three studies were in the USA. Two of these shared a study site. There was one study in Singapore and one in Thailand.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall extent (1 study): One study of a coastal site in the USA reported that the area of mangrove vegetation increased between 6 and 14 years after reprofiling (and planting propagules).
Relative abundance (2 studies): Two site comparison studies in the USA and Singapore reported that areas of reprofiled coastal land (sometimes also planted with propagules) supported a different relative abundance of tree species to natural forests, after roughly 3–15 years.
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One site comparison study in Singapore reported that an area of reprofiled coastal land colonized by mangrove vegetation had higher plant species richness, after three and a half years, than an adjacent mature mangrove patch.
Tree/shrub richness/diversity (3 studies): Two replicated, site comparison studies in the USA, reported that where mangrove forests developed on reprofiled (and planted) sites, they contained a similar number of tree species to nearby mature forests after 7–30 years. One study in a former shrimp pond in Thailand simply reported the number of mangrove tree species that spontaneously colonized in the six years after reprofiling (along with other interventions).

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (1 study): One site comparison study in Singapore reported that an area of reprofiled coastal land colonized by mangrove vegetation had a higher density of individual plants, after three and a half years, than an adjacent mature mangrove patch.
Tree/shrub abundance (3 studies): Two replicated, site comparison studies in the USA, reported that where mangrove forests developed on reprofiled (and planted) sites, they contained a greater density of trees than nearby mature forests after 17–30 years. One study in a former shrimp pond in Thailand simply reported the number of mangrove trees that spontaneously colonized in the six years after reprofiling (along with other interventions).
Individual species abundance (1 study): One study in a former shrimp pond in Thailand reported the number of mangrove trees, by species, that spontaneously colonized in the six years after reprofiling (along with other interventions).

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Overall structure (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA reported that where mangrove forests developed on reprofiled (and planted) sites, they had a different overall structure to nearby mature forests after 17–30 years.
Height (2 studies): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA, reported that where mangrove forests developed on reprofiled (and planted) sites, they had a shorter canopy than nearby mature forests after 17–30 years. One site comparison study in Singapore reported that in an area of reprofiled coastal land colonized by mangrove vegetation, most plants were in a similar height category to those in an adjacent mature mangrove patch, but that the maximum plant height was lower. Vegetation was surveyed three and a half years after reprofiling.
Diameter/perimeter/area (2 studies): Two site comparison studies in the USA reported that mangrove forests that developed on reprofiled (and planted) coastal areas contained thinner trees, on average, than mature natural forests, after 7–18 years.
Basal area (3 studies): Three site comparison studies in the USA compared mangrove forests that developed on reprofiled (and planted) coastal areas to mature natural forests. Two of the studies reported that restored forests had a smaller basal area than mature natural forests, after 7–18 years. The other study reported that restored forests had a similar basal area to mature natural forests, after 17–30 years.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
