1471: Conduct regular anti-poaching patrols 
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Anti-poaching patrols typically consist of a team of people that regularly patrol a pre-defined area to stop or reduce hunting. During patrols, teams may record spatial data on hunting or poaching activities and primate occurrence. Some teams may also capture and arrest illegal hunters on site, seize bushmeat, and destroy hunting camps. Correlative studies have shown that in areas where anti-poaching patrols were conducted, primate densities were higher (Stokes et al. 2010) and at sites where law enforcement guards were present, the probability that gorilla Gorilla spp. and chimpanzee Pan troglodytes populations would persist in the long-term, was higher (Tranquilli et al. 2012). However, while anti-poaching patrols reduced illegal hunting in Garamba National Park, Democratic Republic of Congo, including of primate species, they were inadequate to cope with higher levels of poaching pressure during armed conflict (De Merode et al. 2007). Removing of snares by teams that may form part of anti-poaching patrols is discussed separately under ‘Regularly de-activate/remove ground snares’, and the training of-, and the providing of equipment to anti-poaching patrols is discussed under ‘Provide training to anti-poaching ranger patrols’, and ‘Provide better equipment (e.g. guns) to anti-poaching ranger patrols’. The use of monitoring surveillance strategies and/or monitoring data to improve effectiveness of wildlife law enforcement patrols is discussed under ‘Implement monitoring surveillance strategies (e.g. SMART) or use monitoring data to improve effectiveness of wildlife law enforcement patrols’.
 
De Merode, E., Smith, K. H., Homewood, K., Pettifor, R., Rowcliffe, M., & Cowlishaw, G. (2007). The impact of armed conflict on protected-area efficacy in Central Africa. Biology letters, 3(3), 299-301.
Stokes E.J., Strindberg S., Bakabana P.C., Elkan P.W., Iyenguet F.C., Madzoke B., Malanda G.A.F., Mowawa B.S., Moukoumbou C., Ouakabadio F.K. & Rainey H.J. (2010) Monitoring great ape and elephant abundance at large spatial scales: measuring effectiveness of a conservation landscape. PLoS ONE, 5, e10294.
Tranquilli S., Abedi-Lartey M., Amsini F., Arranz L., Asamoah A., Babafemi O., Barakabuye N., Campbell G., Chancellor R., Davenport T.R.B., Dunn A., Dupain J., Ellis C., Etoga G., Furuichi T., Gatti S., Ghiurghi A., Greengrass E., Hashimoto C., Hart J., Herbinger I., Hicks T.C., Holbech L.H., Huijbregts B., Imong I., Kumpel N., Maisels F., Marshall P., Nixon S., Normand E., Nziguyimpa L., Nzooh-Dogmo Z., Okon D.T., Plumptre A., Rundus A., Sunderland-Groves J., Todd A., Warren Y., Mundry R., Boesch C. & Kuehl H.  (2012) Lack of conservation effort rapidly increases African great ape extinction risk. Conservation Letters, 5, 48–55.

Key Messages:

Two studies in Rwanda found that gorilla populations increased after implementing regular anti-poaching patrols, alongside other interventions. One study in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Rwanda, and Uganda found that gorilla populations declined after conducting regular anti-poaching patrols.
A review on gorillas in Uganda found that no gorillas were killed over a 21 month period when the number of guards carrying out anti-poaching patrols increased, alongside other interventions.
One study in Ghana found a reduction in illegal primate hunting activities following conducting regular anti-poaching patrols, alongside other interventions.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Primate Conservation
Description: Primate Synopsis
