3384: Designate protected area
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This action includes protection of specific marshes or swamps, or areas that contain these habitats, whether through legal means (e.g. many National Parks and Marine Protected Areas) or some other agreement or commitment (e.g. Biosphere Reserves, Ramsar Sites, Wild and Scenic Rivers). Protected areas may be publicly or privately owned.
Protected areas may prohibit all human uses, or allow sustainable use to varying degrees and perhaps within designated zones. ‘Wise use’ of wetlands – allowing activities such as collection of plant materials for handicrafts, fishing, hunting, charcoal production and scientific research, as long as the ecological character of the site is maintained – is a fundamental principle of the Ramsar Convention (Ramsar Convention Secretariat 2010).
Studies that include, or aim to conserve, at least some marsh or swamp habitat are summarized as evidence for this action. Given the broad scale of this action, results may include other wetland habitats (e.g. peatlands and mudflats), aquatic habitats (e.g. rivers and lakes) or upland habitats (e.g. forests). It is not unusual for an entire catchment or watershed to be protected (Sullivan et al. 2018).
We have not summarized the following types of information, which are particularly weak or misleading when assessing effectiveness of protected areas:

Information about implementation only (i.e. area or number of protected sites).
Studies comparing protected and unprotected areas at a single time point (e.g. Imbert & Delbé 2006; Di Bella et al. 2014). In such studies, differences between protected and unprotected areas may simply reflect the fact that “better” areas (e.g. containing more species or marsh/swamp habitat) were selected for protection (Joppa & Pfaff 2009).
Studies examining the effects of specific interventions designed to tackle threats within protected areas (e.g. hunting, vehicle use, overharvesting). These studies are considered in other chapters.

Caution: Restricting certain activities in protected areas could actually increase the threat they pose. For example, restricting prescribed burning might (a) cause a build-up of vegetation or litter, stockpiling fuel for wild fires, or (b) encourage more illicit and uncontrolled burning due to the hurdle of obtaining permits (Pott & Pott 2004).
Related actions: Provide general protection for marshes or swamps; Require mitigation of impacts to marshes or swamps; Pay stakeholders to protect marshes or swamps; Increase ‘on the ground’ protection for marshes or swamps.
Di Bella C.E., Jacobo E., Golluscio R.A. & Rodríguez A.M. (2014) Effect of cattle grazing on soil salinity and vegetation composition along an elevation gradient in a temperate coastal salt marsh of Samborombón Bay (Argentina). Wetlands Ecology and Management, 22, 1–13.
Imbert D. & Delbé L. (2006) Ecology of fire-influenced Cladium jamaicense marshes in Guadeloupe, Lesser Antilles. Wetlands, 26, 289–297.
Joppa L.N. & Pfaff A. (2009) High and far: biases in the location of protected areas. PLoS ONE, 4, e8273.
Pott A. & Pott V.J. (2004) Features and conservation of the Brazilian Pantanal wetland. Wetlands Ecology and Management, 12, 547–552.
Ramsar Convention Secretariat (2010) Wise Use of Wetlands: Concepts and Approaches for the Wise Use of Wetlands, Fourth Edition. Ramsar Convention Secretariat, Gland.
Sullivan C.A., Finlayson C.M., Heagney E., Pelletier M.-C., Acreman M.C. & Hughes J.M.R. (2018) Wetland landscapes and catchment management. Pages 404–421 in: J.M.R. Hughes (ed.) Freshwater Ecology and Conservation: Approaches and Techniques. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the overall effects, on vegetation or human behaviour, of designating protected areas involving marshes or swamps. There were two studies in China, one in Malaysia and one in Puerto Rico.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall extent (4 studies): Two studies (one replicated, one before-and-after) in China reported that the area of marsh, swamp or unspecified wetland in protected areas declined over 6–12 years. One replicated, site comparison study in Puerto Rico reported that protection had no clear effect on mangrove forest area, with similar changes over 25 years in protected and unprotected sites. One study of a mangrove forest in Malaysia reported that it retained at least 97% of its forest area over 98 years of protection as a forest reserve.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE
 
VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Overall structure (2 studies): One replicated study in China reported “degradation” of the landscape structure of protected wetlands over 12 years. One before-and-after study in China reported fragmentation of wetland habitat within a protected area, but that this meant its structure became more like it had been 10–40 years previously.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
