3193: Restore/create brackish/saline marshes or swamps (multiple actions)
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This section includes studies of marsh or swamp restoration/creation that test more than three separate actions at once, such that it is difficult to attribute outcomes to any single specific action. Where three or fewer actions have been used together in a study, results are reported elsewhere on this site: under each action (but noting the influence of the others, where appropriate) or sometimes as a combined action (e.g. Deposit soil/sediment and introduce vegetation). When multiple actions have been used but not clearly described, studies are summarized under Restore/create marshes or swamps (specific action unclear).
This section does not include studies that simply report the area or number of sites “restored” or “created”, without quantifying the vegetation in those sites.

Key Messages:

Eight studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of using &gt;3 combined actions to restore/create brackish/saline marshes or swamps. Six studies were in the USA. One was in Singapore. One was in Indonesia. Three studies were based on the same experimental set-up.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall extent (1 study): One study of a coastal site in the USA reported that the coverage of mangrove vegetation increased, and the coverage of herbaceous vegetation declined, over five years after intervention (intended to restore mangrove forest).
Overall richness/diversity (3 studies): Three studies of one salt marsh restoration site in the USA simply quantified plant species richness for up to 13 growing seasons after intervention.
Tree/shrub richness/diversity (1 study): One site comparison study in Indonesia reported that a restored aquaculture pond contained a similar number of mangrove species to nearby reference forests, just 6–7 months after intervention. Some trees may have been present before intervention.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (4 studies): One replicated, paired, site comparison study of salt marshes in the USA found that restored marshes had similar overall vegetation cover to natural marshes after 9–20 years. Three studies of one salt marsh restoration site in the USA simply quantified overall vegetation abundance for up to 13 growing seasons after intervention.
Tree/shrub abundance (3 studies): One replicated, paired, site comparison study of salt marshes in the USA found that restored marshes had similar, limited shrub cover to natural marshes after 9–20 years. One site comparison study of mangrove forests in Singapore reported that a created mangrove forest supported lower above-ground biomass than mature natural forests after ≥15 years. One study in Indonesia simply counted the number of mangrove trees present 6–7 months after intervention.
Individual species abundance (4 studies): Four studies in estuaries in the USA simply quantified the abundance of individual plant species for up to 13 growing seasons after intervention.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Overall structure (1 study): One replicated, paired, site comparison study of salt marshes in the USA found that restored marshes had less cover of short vegetation and greater cover of medium-height vegetation than natural marshes after 9–20 years. Restored and natural marshes had similar cover of tall vegetation.
Height (2 studies): One study of a created mangrove forest in Singapore reported that the average height of surviving mangrove saplings increased over five years. One study of a salt marsh restoration site in the USA reported that maximum vegetation height did not clearly increase between the third and twelfth/thirteenth growing seasons after intervention.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
