3331: Use fences or barriers to protect planted brackish/saline wetlands planted with trees/shrubs
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Plants introduced to wetlands may be vulnerable to physical damage from grazing, wind, waves or sediment. Barriers could be used to protect planted vegetation from such physical damage. Here, “barriers” is used quite broadly and includes sleeves, tree guards, fences and fine-meshed silt screens placed around planted vegetation, sticky oils or resins painted onto planted vegetation, and offshore walls or breakwaters. Some of these barriers may have incidental effects on temperature, humidity and sunlight intensity (but covers and screens whose main aim is to modify these factors are considered elsewhere). If the general area containing planted vegetation is fenced, rather than individual planted plants, other colonizing vegetation may benefit too.
Related actions: Use barriers to keep livestock off ungrazed swamps; Exclude or remove livestock from historically grazed swamps; Exclude wild vertebrates using physical barriers; Exclude wild invertebrates using physical barriers; Add surface mulch to complement planting; Add cover other than mulch to complement planting.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of using fences or barriers to protect brackish/saline wetlands planted with trees/shrubs. The study was in the USA.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE
 
VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in exposed coastal sites in the USA found that red mangrove Rhizophora mangle propagules planted within full-length plastic shelters had grown taller than propagules planted without shelter in three of four comparisons, made 22–129 days after planting.

OTHER

Survival (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in exposed coastal sites in the USA reported that full-length plastic shelters increased the survival rate of planted red mangrove Rhizophora mangle propagules over 4–8 months, but that full-length bamboo shelters and below-ground plastic shelters had no clear effect on survival.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
