3786: Provide supplementary food or water 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Providing supplementary food could have a positive effect on wild reptile populations, particularly where natural food sources in the wider environment are scarce. Supplementary food may be used to support small, vulnerable populations, including in the context of translocations and reintroductions. Translocated or released reptiles may be especially vulnerable immediately after release, while they struggle to find natural food in an unfamiliar area. Furthermore, if the time they spend looking for food is increased, this may make them more vulnerable to predation. Hence, providing supplementary food and/or water at and after the period of release may improve longer term survival.
Supplementary food may also be provided in the context of wildlife tourism operations. However, under these circumstances care should be taken to ensure that the provision of potentially unnecessary food does not lead to unintended negative consequences for wild populations.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects of providing supplementary food or water on reptile populations. Two studies were in the USA and one was in each of Indonesia and Australia.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Survival (2 studies): One replicated, controlled study in the USA found that translocated desert tortoises given supplementary water had similar survival over two years compared to those given no supplementary water.
Reproduction (1 study): One randomized, controlled study in the USA found that more Western diamond-backed rattlesnakes provided with supplementary food reproduced compared snakes that were not fed.
Condition (2 studies): Two controlled studies (including one randomized and one replicated study) in the USA found that Western diamond-backed rattlesnakes or translocated desert tortoises that were given supplementary food or water grew more than those that were not supplemented.

BEHAVIOUR (4 STUDIES)

Use (1 studies): One controlled, before-and-after study in Indonesia found that areas where supplementary food was provided were used more frequently by Komodo dragons than other parts of the island.
Behaviour change (3 studies): One of two controlled studies (including one replicated, before-and-after study) in the USA and Australia found that that Pygmy bluetongue lizards translocated into enclosures and given supplementary food showed differences in three behaviour measures compared to lizards given no food. The other study found that fed and unfed Western diamond-backed rattlesnakes showed similar behaviours across four measures. One replicated, controlled study in the USA found that translocated desert tortoises given supplementary water moved longer distances than those given no supplementary water.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
