521: Provide supplementary food
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Food supply is one of the key factors determining mortality and reproductive rates. Providing supplementary food is therefore often used as a technique to support small populations. However, feeding is only likely to have a positive effect on a population if the food supply is limiting either reproduction or survival. Because of differences in population responses to food during the breeding season and at other times, we have divided studies into those investigating the impact of feeding on reproduction and those investigating adult survival.
As with all interventions in this synopsis, studies that investigate population-level effects are most useful for conservationists. This is especially true for supplementary feeding, as many birds have large foraging ranges and the appearance of increased numbers at a feeding station, or even in the habitat surrounding feeders may not represent an increase in numbers but a redistribution of the same birds, and could even hide a population decline.
It is also important to note that the effect of providing food can be confounded by many factors. For example, variations in natural food supplies due to population cycles or irregular fruiting, whilst droughts or other extreme weather and pollution levels can also affect how populations respond to food.
 
 
Providing supplementary food can also be used to improve the success of release programs for captive-bred birds. Studies describing this intervention are discussed in ‘Captive breeding, rearing and releases (ex situ conservation) – Provide supplementary food after release’.
 

Key Messages:
A replicated, controlled study from Europe found that overall, gardens with supplementary food did not contain more species than those without. However, there was some evidence that gardens with supplementary food in five countries did contain more species than unfed ones, when countries were analysed separately.
 
For specific interventions see: provide supplementary food

Synopsis Details:
Title: Bird Conservation
Description: Bird Synopsis
