895: Convert to organic farming
Effectiveness rating: Trade off between benefit and harms
Background information and definitions:
Soil microbial biomass is the amount of tiny living organisms within a given area or amount of soil. Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi are a group of fungi that live around the roots of plants. By living together, the fungi and host plant benefit each other: the fungi can live in a habitat without having to compete for resources and have a supply of carbon from the plant, while they benefit the plant with an enhanced supply of nutrients, improved growth and ability to reproduce, and tolerance to drought. Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi colonise a wide variety of host plants, including grasses, herbs, agricultural crops and legumes (Bardgett 2005). They are associated with extensively managed and undisturbed soils. Functional diversity is the value and range of functional roles (or ‘traits’) that organisms play in a given ecosystem (Tilman 2001), in this case the agro-ecosystem. Highly diverse and active soil organisms indicate good soil health. Functional diversity tends to be measured using indexes based on the number of species, or the number of different groups that perform different functions within the ecosystem, for example (there are more). Nematodes play important roles in soil nutrient cycling by feeding on microorganisms. They can be good indicators of ecosystem health as they feed on a wide range of organisms and their community structure reflects the health of their environment.
Bardgett R. (2005) The Biology of Soil: A community and ecosystem approach. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Neher, D.A., 2001. Role of nematodes in soil health and their use as indicators. Journal of Nematology, 33 (4), 161–168.
Tilman D. 2001. Functional diversity. Pages 109-120 in: S.A. Levin (ed.) Encyclopedia of Biodiversity. Academic Press, Waltham, USA.

Key Messages:
Biodiversity: Four studies in Asia, Europe, and the USA (including two site comparison studies and three replicated trials) found higher numbers, diversity, functional diversity (see background) or activity of soil organisms under organic management.
Soil organic carbon: Two replicated trials in Italy and the USA showed that organically managed orchards had higher soil carbon levels compared to conventionally managed orchards. One randomized, replicated trial in the USA found soil carbon was lower under organic management compared to alley cropping.  
Soil organic matter: One replicated trial in Canada found that soil nutrients were lower in organically managed soils.
Yields: One replicated trial in Canada found lower yields in organically managed soils. Two replicated trials in the USA (one also randomized) found that fruit was of a higher quality and more resistant to disease, though smaller or that organic management had mixed effects on yield.
SOIL TYPES COVERED: clay, clay loam, fine sandy-loam, loam, sandy loam, sandy-clay loam, silt, silty-clay, silt-loam.
 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Soil Fertility
Description: Soils Synopsis
