3429: Inoculate soil with mycorrhiza before seeding/planting
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Modern agricultural practices such as ploughing and application of pesticides and fertilizer may reduce the abundance of mycorrhizal fungi (Helgason et al. 1998, Johnson 1993). As a result, addition of mycorrhiza to degraded habitats may help natural plant communities to establish.
Inoculating soil with mycorrhizal fungi often involves the transfer of soil or plant material where mycorrhiza are already present to new areas. These microorganisms can increase nutrient uptake and protect against root pathogens (Smith & Read 2008). In grasslands, mycorrhizal fungi can increase species diversity and productivity (Van der Heijden et al. 1998).
The studies detailed in this intervention are direct tests of the effectiveness of inoculating soil with mycorrhiza before seeding or planting (e.g. by comparison with an untreated but seeded or planted plot). Studies that represent comparisons of seeding to unseeded plots can be found in the actions ‘Sow grass seeds’, ‘Sow grassland forb species’ or ‘Sow native grass and forbs’.
Helgason, T., Daniell, T., Husband, R., Fitter, A. & Young, J. (1998) Ploughing up the wood-wide web? Nature, 394, 431.
Johnson, N.C. (1993) Can fertilization of soil select less mutualistic mycorrhizae? Ecological applications, 3, 749–757.
Smith, S.E. & Read, D.J. (2008) Mycorrhizal symbiosis. Academic Press, USA.
Van der Heijden, M.G., Klironomos, J.N., Ursic, M., Moutoglis, P., Streitwolf-Engel, R., Boller, T., Wiemken, A. & Sanders, I.R. (1998) Mycorrhizal fungal diversity determines plant biodiversity, ecosystem variability and productivity. Nature, 396, 69.

Key Messages:

Five studies examined the effects of inoculating soil with mycorrhiza before seeding/planting on grassland vegetation. Four studies were in the USA and one was in Germany.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY (1 STUDY)

Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in Germany found that inoculating soil with mycorrhizal fungi and sowing seeds of grassland species did not alter plant species richness.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE (4 STUDIES)

Overall abundance (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the USA found that inoculating soil with mycorrhizal fungi before sowing seeds initially increased vegetation cover, but after three years, vegetation cover did not differ between areas that were and were not inoculated. One controlled study in the USA found that adding soil microbes and nutrients when planting grass plugs did not change the overall cover of herbaceous species.
Characteristic plant abundance (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in Germany found that adding mycorrhiza to the soil and sowing seeds of grassland species increased the abundance of target species that were considered a local conservation priority. One controlled study in the USA found that adding soil microbes and nutrients when planting grass plugs increased the cover of three of 38 native prairie species.
Tree/shrub abundance (1 study): One controlled study in the USA found that adding soil microbes and nutrients when planting grass plugs did not change the cover of woody species.
Native/non-target species abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the USA found that adding mycorrhizal fungi to soil before sowing seeds did not alter the biomass of three native grass and forb species.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE (1 STUDY)

Height (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the USA found that adding mycorrhizal fungi to soil before sowing seeds increased the height of giant sacaton plants.
Individual plant size (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the USA found that adding mycorrhizal fungi to soil before sowing seeds did not increase the biomass of giant sacaton plants.

OTHER (1 STUDY) 

Germination/Emergence (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the USA found that adding mycorrhizal fungi to soil before sowing seeds did not increase the emergence of giant sacaton plants.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Grassland Conservation
Description: Grassland Synopsis
