3425: Add mulch before or after seeding/planting
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Mulch is organic material, such as leaves or bark, which is spread over soil with the aim of improving germination and survival of target plants. Mulch may increase soil water availability, thereby aiding plant germination (Donath et al. 2007) as well as protecting against erosion. However, thick mulch layers may also prevent the germination of seeds that respond to changes in light and temperature, and survival of seedlings that are shaded by mulch (Facelli & Pickett 1991, Suding & Goldberg 1999).
The studies detailed in this intervention are direct tests of the effectiveness of adding mulch before or after seeding or planting (e.g. by comparison with an unmulched but seeded or planted plot). Studies that represent comparisons of seeding to unseeded plots can be found in the actions ‘Sow grass seeds’, ‘Sow grassland forb species’ or ‘Sow native grass and forbs’.
Donath, T.W., Bissels, S., Hölzel, N. & Otte, A. (2007) Large scale application of diaspore transfer with plant material in restoration practice – Impact of seed and microsite limitation. Biological Conservation, 138, 224–234.
Facelli, J.M. & Pickett, S.T.A. (1991) Plant litter: Its dynamics and effects on plant community structure. The Botanical Review, 57, 1–32.
Suding, K.N.H. & Goldberg, D.E. (2001) Variation in the effects of vegetation and litter on recruitment across productivity gradients. Journal of Ecology, 87, 436–449.

Key Messages:

Six studies examined the effects of adding mulch before or after seeding/planting on grassland vegetation. Two studies were in Canada, two were in the USA, and one study was in each of the UK and Germany.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY (1 STUDY)

Characteristic plant richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Germany found that adding mulch before sowing seeds did not alter the species richness of target plants.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE (4 STUDIES)

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Canada found that adding mulch before sowing seeds did not increase plant cover.
Characteristic plant abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Germany found that adding mulch before sowing seeds increased the cover of target plant species.
Sown/planted species abundance (2 studies): One of two replicated, randomized, controlled studies in the USA and UK found that adding mulch before sowing seeds did not alter the density of six sown plant species in most cases. The other study found that adding mulch before planting seedlings reduced the cover of planted species.
Individual species abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in the UK found that adding mulch before planting seedlings did not alter the cover of common knapweed.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (2 STUDIES) 

Germination/Emergence (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Canada found that adding mulch before sowing seeds increased the number of seedlings in most cases.
Growth (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in the USA found that adding mulch after planting native prairie plants did not alter the growth of any of seven plant species.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Grassland Conservation
Description: Grassland Synopsis
