2985: Abandon mined land: allow brackish/saline marshes or swamps to recover without active intervention
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
It may be possible that marshes or swamps will recover on their own, without any active intervention, if human activities are stopped. Such passive recovery can be cheaper than active intervention and allow development of a community well adapted to local conditions. However, plant colonization may not occur at all or, if it does, occur slowly or be dominated by invasive species (Zahawi et al. 2014). Successful recovery may be hindered by physical degradation (e.g. a water table that is too low, restricted tidal exchange, compacted sediment), chemical degradation (e.g. acidified soils or presence of heavy metals) or an insufficient supply of propagules.
To be summarized as evidence for this action, studies must have monitored historically mined land that has been abandoned (mining activities completely stopped, with no additional intervention) with the expectation that marshes or swamps could recover (i.e. excluding studies of abandoned upland mines). Therefore, the summarized evidence is best considered as an indication of what kind of vegetation can develop in historically mined areas, and how long it takes to develop, rather than a complete survey of all relevant evidence.
Related actions: Abandon cropland; Abandon plantations.
Zahawi R.A., Reid J.L. & Holl K.D. (2014) Hidden costs of passive restoration. Restoration Ecology, 22, 284–287.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of abandoning formerly mined land with the expectation that brackish/saline marshes or swamps would recover spontaneously. The study was in France.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community types (1 study): One replicated study in France simply classified the plant community types that developed on abandoned salt pans. Areas flooded for at least part of the year developed salt marsh plant communities, with the exact community composition depending on the duration of flooding and soil salinity.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE
 
VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
