1811: Disturb peatland surface to encourage growth of desirable plants (without planting)
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Mechanically disturbing the peat or soil surface (e.g. by tilling, ploughing or scarifying) can encourage the growth of desirable plants. It can create bare patches, clear of previous dominant species, in which peatland plants can grow. Peatland plants may colonize from nearby patches or germinate from seeds or spores already in the soil. Colonizing plants will typically be fast-growing, weedy species – but sometimes these are desirable members of natural peatland plant communities, or are desirable to provide some cover that can shelter and nurse other colonizing plants.
Caution: Disturbance can destroy the physical structure of the peat and aerate the peat more than usual. Deep ploughing could mix the peat with underlying mineral soil.
Key peatland types where this action may be appropriate: bogs, fens/fen meadows, tropical peat swamps.
Related actions: physically damage problematic plants, including by disturbing the peat/soil; bury upper layer of peat or soil, as opposed to shallow disturbance only.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects of disturbing the peat surface (without planting) on peatland vegetation. Both studies were in fens.
Plant community composition (2 studies): Two replicated, paired, controlled, before-and-after studies (one also randomized) in fens in Germany and Sweden reported that soil disturbance affected development of the plant community over 2–3 years. In Germany, disturbed plots developed greater cover of weedy species from the seed bank than undisturbed plots. In Sweden, the community in disturbed and undisturbed plots became less similar over time. 
Characteristic plants (2 studies): The same two studies reported that wetland- or fen-characteristic plant species colonized plots that had been disrturbed (along with other interventions). The study in Germany noted that peat-forming species did not colonize the fen.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
