2179: Limit, cease or prohibit the dumping of sewage sludge
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Sewage sludge is the residual, semi-solid material produced as a by-product during sewage treatment. Sewage sludge can be disposed of at sea and can impact subtidal benthic invertebrates through the introduction of bacteria, heavy metals and chemicals (McGann et al., 2003). Limiting, ceasing or prohibiting the dumping of sewage sludge in an area may potentially benefit subtidal benthic invertebrates by reducing or stopping the source of pollution and allowing communities to potentially recover over time (Birchenough & Frid 2009). Evidence for related interventions is summarised under “Threat: Pollution – Domestic and urban wastewater”.
 
Birchenough S.N. & Frid C.L. (2009) Macrobenthic succession following the cessation of sewage sludge disposal. Journal of Sea Research, 62, 258–267.
McGann M., Alexander C.R. & Bay S.M. (2003) Response of benthic foraminifers to sewage discharge and remediation in Santa Monica Bay, California. Marine Environmental Research, 56, 299–342.

Key Messages:

Two studies examined the effects of ceasing or prohibiting the dumping of sewage sludge on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations. One study was in the New York Bight (USA), one in the North Sea (UK).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Overall community composition (2 studies): One before-and-after, site comparison study in the New York Bight found that after ceasing sewage sludge dumping, overall invertebrate community composition became more similar to less disturbed sites. One replicated, site comparison study in the North Sea found that overall invertebrate community composition changed but remained different to that of natural sites.

POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the North Sea found that after ceasing sewage sludge dumping, overall invertebrate abundance became similar to that of natural sites.
Worm abundance (1 study): One before-and-after, site comparison study in the New York Bight found that after ceasing sewage sludge dumping, abundance of pollution-indicator polychaete worms decreased and became similar to that of natural sites.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
