3419: Mow before or after seeding/planting
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Mowing involves cutting grass to a uniform height with specialized machinery. This may help to maintain or increase grassland diversity as well as reducing the abundance of woody plant species. Combining mowing with sowing of seeds or planting may further help to promote diversity by introducing plant species that were not previously present.
The studies detailed in this intervention are direct tests of the effectiveness of mowing before or after seeding or planting (e.g. by comparison with an unmown but seeded or planted plot). Studies that represent comparisons of seeding to unseeded plots can be found in the actions ‘Sow grass seeds’, ‘Sow grassland forb species’ or ‘Sow native grass and forbs’.
Collins, S.L., Knapp, A.K., Briggs, J.M., Blair, J.M. & Steinauer, E.M. (1998) Modulation of diversity by grazing and mowing in native tallgrass prairie. Science, 280, 745–747.

Key Messages:

Ten studies examined the effects of mowing before or after seeding/planting on grassland vegetation. Nine studies were in Europe and one was in China.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY (5 STUDIES)

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in Hungary found that annual mowing after sowing seeds increased plant community similarity to that of natural grassland.
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the UK found that cutting vegetation yearly after sowing seeds increased plant species richness compared to grazing with livestock.
Characteristic plant richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Germany found that cutting vegetation three times/year after sowing seeds increased the richness of characteristic grassland species compared to cutting once/year.
Sown/planted species richness/diversity (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the UK found that mowing after sowing seeds increased the richness of sown species. One replicated study in the UK found that cutting sown plots each year and removing cut vegetation increased sown grass and forb species richness compared to cutting and not removing cut vegetation.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE (4 STUDIES)

Sown/planted species abundance (3 studies): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the UK found that mowing after sowing seeds increased the abundance of sown forb species. One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in Germany found that mowing more frequently after sowing seeds increased the abundance of five of seven sown forb species. One replicated study in the UK found that cutting sown plots each year and removing cut vegetation reduced the cover of sown grass and forb species compared to cutting and not removing cut vegetation.
Individual plant species abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Germany found that mowing after planting increased the biomass of transplanted ragged robin and birdsfoot trefoil plants at 2–3 of seven sites.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (4 STUDIES) 

Germination/Emergence (3 studies): One of three replicated, controlled studies (including two randomized and one paired study) in the UK, Germany and China found that mowing after sowing seeds increased the germination of four grassland plant species. One study found that mowing after sowing seeds increased the number of ragged robin and birdsfoot trefoil seedlings at 1–2 of seven sites. One study found that cutting grass after sowing seeds did not alter the emergence rate or density of seedlings.
Survival (2 studies): One of two replicated, randomized, paired, controlled studies in Germany and China found that cutting grass after sowing seeds did not alter seedling survival. The other study found that cutting grass after sowing seeds did not alter seedling survival.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Grassland Conservation
Description: Grassland Synopsis
