3881: Mechanically remove mid-storey or ground vegetation to create fire breaks 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Wildfires can spread quickly through dry landscapes, in particular where flammable vegetation has accumulated. This can pose a threat to both wildlife and people. One option for pre-empting the control of wildfires is to create “fire breaks” in the landscape, where vegetation is cleared to prevent future fires from spreading between adjacent areas. Fire breaks may also be created prior to prescribed burning, to contain the burn within a desired area. In addition to any benefits from the reduction in the spread of the fire, breaks may create suitable habitat for butterflies and moths in their own right. Both outcomes are considered in studies in this action.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of mechanically removing mid-storey or ground vegetation to create fire breaks. One study was in Portugal and the other was in France.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Richness/diversity (2 studies): One replicated, site comparison study in Portugal found that cork oak woodlands with more recent or more regular mechanical clearance of woody understorey vegetation had a greater species richness of butterflies than woodlands cleared less frequently or longer ago. One replicated, paired, controlled study in France reported that shrublands where trees and/or bushes were mechanically cleared to create firebreaks had a similar species richness of butterflies to a shrubland where grazing was used to suppress vegetation.

POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in Portugal found that cork oak woodlands with more recent or more regular mechanical clearance of woody understorey vegetation had a higher abundance of butterflies than woodlands cleared less frequently or longer ago.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
