3414: Remove leaf litter before seeding/planting
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Traditional management of grasslands, such as mowing and grazing, can help to prevent a build-up of plant litter. However, many grasslands have been abandoned leading to accumulation of litter which may reduce the growth and germination of some grassland plants. Removing this litter may, consequently, aid growth and germination of grassland plants.
The studies detailed in this intervention are direct tests of the effectiveness of removing leaf litter before seeding or planting (e.g. by comparison with a seeded or planted plot with leaf litter left in place). Studies that represent comparisons of seeding to unseeded plots can be found in the actions ‘Sow grass seeds’, ‘Sow grassland forb species’ or ‘Sow native grass and forbs’.

Key Messages:

Three studies examined the effects of removing leaf litter before seeding/planting on grassland vegetation. One study was in each of Germany, Belgium and Hungary.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY (0 STUDIES)
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE (2 STUDIES)

Sown/planted species abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in Hungary found that removing leaf litter before sowing seeds did not increase the cover of either of two sown grass species.
Individual plant species abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Germany found that removing leaf litter before planting did not alter the biomass of ragged robin and marsh birdsfoot trefoil transplants in most cases.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (3 STUDIES) 

Germination/Emergence (3 studies): Two of three replicated, controlled studies (one of which was also randomized and paired) in Germany, Belgium and Hungary found that removing leaf litter, and in one study also removing vegetation, before sowing seeds had mixed effects on the number of seedlings of sown plant species. The other study found no change in the number of seedlings of either of two grass species.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Grassland Conservation
Description: Grassland Synopsis
