2963: Use barriers to keep livestock off ungrazed brackish/salt marshes
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
This action involves excluding livestock – with physical barriers such as fences or hedgerows, or virtual barriers involving GPS trackers and negative sounds or electric shocks (SRUC 2015) – from an area of natural, ungrazed marsh or swamp. Here, “ungrazed” refers to the recent history of a site, so studies of sites that have not been recently grazed and so have regained their natural ecological character would also be included here.
Domestic livestock can directly consume vegetation, destroy vegetation by trampling, create bare patches of ground (e.g. repeatedly used tracks), affect water infiltration and flows by compacting soils, affect nutrient balance through excretion of waste products, and import seeds of undesirable plants (Morris & Reich 2013).
Related actions: Exclude or remove livestock from historically grazed brackish/salt marshes; Use grazing to maintain or restore disturbance; Use grazing to control problematic plants; Exclude wild vertebrates; Use fences or barriers to protect planted areas.
Morris K. & Reich P. (2013) Understanding the Relationship Between Livestock Grazing and Wetland Condition. Arthur Rylah Institute for Environmental Research, Technical Report Series No. 252.
SRUC (2015) Virtual Fencing Systems for Livestock. Available at https://www.sruc.ac.uk/download/downloads/id/3128/virtual_fencing_systems_for_livestock.pdf. Accessed 7 January 2020.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of using barriers to keep livestock off brackish/salt marshes that have never (or not recently) been grazed. The study was in the UK.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in a salt marsh in the UK reported that plots fenced to exclude sheep contained more plant species, after four years, than plots that became grazed by sheep.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in a salt marsh in the UK reported that plots fenced to exclude sheep contained more vegetation biomass, after two years, than plots that became grazed by sheep.
Individual species abundance (1 study): The same study also quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. For example, plots fenced to exclude sheep contained more cordgrass Spartina and less saltbush Atriplex hastata, after four years, than plots that became grazed by sheep.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
