2938: Protect spawning fish from capture
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Fishing can impact marine fish through species removal or habitat damage from fishing gear contacting the seabed. Many fish species are known to aggregate into denser groups of individuals during specific times to reproduce (spawn) or during early development (nursery areas). The groups may be made up exclusively of fish of one sex and/or stage of maturity. The months during which spawning activity takes place differs between species and areas and the onset is normally dependent on water temperatures. But for any given species/area the overall timing of these periods can be relatively stable between years. As well as taking place at regular times, spawning activity may also take place at the same sites each year, making their occurrence more easily predicted. In the same way nursery habitats used by groups of very young fish are often identifiable. Protecting known spawning or nursing individuals by prohibiting or limiting fishing activity may reduce fishing mortality during highly sensitive periods and allow reproduction or early development to take place with minimal disturbance.
Evidence for a similar intervention relating to the protection of spawning activity is summarized under ‘Spatial and Temporal Management - Establish temporary fishery closures’.

Key Messages:

Four studies examined the effects of protecting spawning fish on marine fish populations. Two studies were in the North Atlantic Ocean (Canada, UK) and one study was in each of the Philippine Sea (Palau) and the Tasman Sea (Australia). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Abundance (1 study): One before-and-after, site comparison study in the Atlantic Ocean found no increase in the biomass of the spawning stock of Atlantic cod in the nine years following implementation of a seasonal fishery closure to protect spawning cod, compared to fished areas.
Survival (1 study): One before-and-after, site comparison study in the Atlantic Ocean found no change in Atlantic cod survival in the nine years after a seasonal fishery closure to protect spawning cod was implemented, compared to fished areas.
Condition (1 study): One before-and-after, site comparison study in the Atlantic Ocean found no change in the length composition of Atlantic cod in the nine years following a seasonal fishery closure to protect spawning cod, compared to fished areas.

BEHAVIOUR (2 STUDIES)

Use (2 studies): One site comparison study and one study in the Northeast Atlantic Ocean and Tasman Sea reported that spawning and/or nursery areas closed seasonally or permanently to fishing were used by tagged adult Atlantic cod for nearly a third of time during spawning, and by school sharks less than one year old for up to 80% of time, but by school sharks between one and two years old for 18% of time, compared to areas outside.

OTHER (2 STUDIES)

Commercial catch abundance (2 studies): One before-and-after, site comparison study in the Atlantic Ocean found no change over nine years in commercial catches of Atlantic cod following a seasonal fishery closure to protect spawning cod compared to fished areas. One replicated, controlled study in the Philippine Sea found that during seasonal closure of a grouper fishery to protect spawning individuals, the commercial catch numbers of other fish groups (herbivores) increased, indicating they were being targeted more by spear fishers compared to the open season.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
