2584: Provide artificial dens or nest boxes on trees
Effectiveness rating: Beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Some mammals use cavities in trees for denning, roosting or breeding. Woodland management for timber extraction may disproportionately remove trees that are sufficiently mature to have developed such cavities. Nest boxes, usually made of wood and attached to tree trunks, may provide an environment that mimics natural tree cavities and is adopted by such mammals. This intervention includes creation of artificial cavities within the tree, by excavating a quantity of wood and replacing a front plate with a constricted opening.
This intervention specifically includes artificial dens or nest boxes in or on trees. For provision of structures in other situations, see Provide artificial refuges/breeding sites.

Key Messages:

Thirty studies evaluated the effects on mammals of providing artificial dens or nest boxes on trees. Fourteen studies were in Australia, nine were in the USA, three were in the UK, one was in each of Canada, Lithuania, South Africa and Japan.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (6 STUDIES)

Abundance (5 studies): Three of five controlled studies (three also replicated) in the USA, the UK, Canada and Lithuania, found that provision of artificial dens or nest boxes increased abundances of gray squirrels and common dormice. The other two studies found that northern flying squirrel and Douglas squirrel abundances did not increase.
Condition (1 study): A replicated, randomized, paired sites, controlled, before-and-after study in Canada found that nest boxes provision did not increase body masses of northern flying squirrel or Douglas squirrel.

BEHAVIOUR (27 STUDIES)

Use (27 studies): Twenty-seven studies, in Australia, the USA, the UK, Canada, South Africa and Japan found that artificial dens or nest boxes were used by a range of mammal species for roosting and breeding.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
