3452: Create grooves <i>and</i> small protrusions, ridges or ledges (1–50 mm) on subtidal artificial structures
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Definition: ‘Groove habitats’ are depressions with a length to width ratio &gt;3:1 and depth 1–50 mm (modified from “Crevices” in Strain et al. 2018). ‘Small protrusions’ are elevations with a length to width ratio ≤3:1 that protrude 1–50 mm from the substratum (modified from “Small elevations” in Strain et al. 2018). ‘Small ridges and ledges’ are elevations with a length to width ratio &gt;3:1 that protrude 1–50 mm from the substratum (modified from “Small elevations” in Strain et al. 2018). On vertical surfaces, vertically-orientated elevations that fit these criteria are referred to as ‘ridges’, while horizontal ones are referred to as ‘ledges’. On horizontal surfaces, these features are referred to as ‘ridges’ regardless of their orientation.
Grooves, small protrusions, ridges and ledges provide organisms refuge from predation or grazing in subtidal rocky habitats (Nelson & Vance 1979; Wahl & Hoppe 2002). Some species preferentially settle in and around them (Andrews & Anderson 2004; Bourget et al. 1994). The size and density of grooves, protrusions, ridges and ledges is likely to affect the size, abundance and variety of organisms that can use them. Small habitats can provide refuge for small-bodied organisms but may exclude larger organisms, limit their growth and get rapidly filled-up (Firth et al. 2020). Large habitats can be used by larger-bodied organisms but may not provide sufficient refuge from predators for smaller organisms. By default, horizontal protrusions/ledges (overhangs) create shaded and downward-facing surfaces, which can be associated with the presence of non-native species (Dafforn 2017).
Grooves, protrusions, ridges and ledges are sometimes present on artificial structures such as cable mattresses (Lacey & Hayes 2020) or quarried boulders (MacArthur et al. 2020), but are often absent from other types of structures. Groove habitats, small protrusions, ridges and ledges can be created on subtidal artificial structures by adding or removing material, either during construction or retrospectively. In some scenarios, creating one will automatically result in creation of the other (i.e. grooves created in between created protrusions/ridges/ledges, or vice versa). Studies containing such scenarios are considered under this joint intervention.
See also: Create textured surfaces (≤1 mm) on subtidal artificial structures; Create natural rocky reef topography on subtidal artificial structures; Create pit habitats (1–50 mm) on subtidal artificial structures; Create hole habitats (&gt;50 mm) on subtidal artificial structures; Create groove habitats (1–50 mm) on subtidal artificial structures; Create crevice habitats (&gt;50 mm) on subtidal artificial structures; Create small protrusions (1–50 mm) on subtidal artificial structures; Create small ridges or ledges (1–50 mm) on subtidal artificial structures.

Key Messages:

Three studies examined the effects of creating groove habitats and small protrusions, ridges or ledges on subtidal artificial structures on the biodiversity of those structures. Two studies were in marinas in northern Israel and the UK and one was on an open coastline in southeast Spain.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Overall community composition (2 studies): One of two replicated, randomized, controlled studies (including one paired sites, before-and-after study) in Israel and the UK found that groove habitats and small ledges created on a subtidal artificial structure, along with holes and environmentally-sensitive material, altered the combined macroalgae and invertebrate community composition on structure surfaces. They also supported non-mobile invertebrate species that were absent from structure surfaces without added habitat features. One study found that creating grooves and small protrusions had mixed effects on the community composition, depending on the orientation of structure surfaces.
Overall richness/diversity (2 studies): One of two replicated, randomized, controlled studies (including one paired sites, before-and-after study) in Israel and the UK found that creating groove habitats and small ledges on a subtidal artificial structure, along with holes and environmentally-sensitive material, increased the combined macroalgae and invertebrate species richness and diversity on structure surfaces. One study found that creating grooves and small protrusions did not increase the species diversity but had mixed effects on species richness, depending on the orientation of structure surfaces.

POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in the UK found that creating groove habitats and small protrusions on subtidal artificial structures had mixed effects on the combined macroalgae and non-mobile invertebrate abundance, depending on the orientation of structure surfaces.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Use (1 study): One replicated study in Spain reported that groove habitats and small protrusions created on subtidal artificial structures were colonized by macroalgae and non-mobile invertebrates.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Biodiversity of Marine Artificial Structures
Description: Enhancing biodiversity of marine artificial structures synopsis
