2721: Fit a size-sorting escape grid (rigid or flexible) to a prawn/shrimp trawl net
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Commercial shrimp or prawn trawl nets are made of small mesh codends that retain the smaller sized crustacean species. But this results in large amounts of other marine animals, like fish, also being caught. The unwanted catch of fish and other large marine animals in shrimp/prawn fisheries has long been considered unacceptable and ways to reduce it have been developed since at least the 1970s (Jenkins 2012). One way is a specialized grid (‘bycatch reduction device’ or ‘turtle excluder device’) to exclude fish from the net whilst not losing the commercial catch of shrimps or prawns. The grid is installed in a net at an angle in front of the codend and has an escape opening for fish and other marine animals either at the top or bottom. Grids can be made from metal, plastics or mesh netting and have either vertical or horizontal bars. Grids are designed to work by creating a barrier to fish that are too large to pass through the spaces between the bars and instead they pass out of the trawl net through the escape openings. Grids may also feature guiding panels or other mechanisms to further encourage fish escape and reduce the overall amount of unwanted fish catch.
When the fitting of size-sorting escape grids is implemented in trawl nets targeting fish, the evidence has been summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification - Fit a size-sorting escape grid (rigid or flexible) to a fish trawl net’. Evidence for interventions related to the use of different types or configurations of grids in trawls is summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification – Use a different design or configuration of size-sorting escape grid/system in trawl fishing gear (bottom and mid-water)’. Evidence of this intervention when used in combination with other interventions to reduce unwanted catch in trawl nets is summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification - Fit a size-sorting escape grid (rigid or flexible) to trawl nets and use a square mesh instead of a diamond mesh codend’ and ‘Fit mesh escape panels/windows and a size-sorting grid (rigid or flexible) to a trawl net’.
Jenkins L.D. (2012) Reducing Sea Turtle Bycatch in Trawl Nets: A History of NMFS Turtle Excluder Device (TED) Research. Marine Fisheries Review, 74, 26–44.

Key Messages:

Thirty studies examined the effects of fitting size-sorting escape grids to prawn/shrimp trawl nets on marine fish populations. Five studies were in the North Sea (Scotland/Norway, Belgium/Netherlands, UK, Scotland), four were in the Coral Sea (Australia) and two were in each of the Gulf of Carpentaria (Australia), the Indian Ocean (Australia, Mozambique), the North Atlantic Ocean (Portugal, USA), the Pacific Ocean (Chile, USA), the Skagerrak and Kattegat (northern Europe) and the South Atlantic Ocean (Brazil). One study was in each of the Tasman Sea (Australia), the Greenland Sea (Svalbard), the Bay of Biscay (France), the Gulf of Maine (USA), the Gulf of Thailand (Vietnam), the Tyrrhenian Sea (Italy), the Gulf of St Vincent (Australia), the Persian Gulf (Iran) and the Northeast Atlantic Ocean (Norway).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (30 STUDIES)

Reduction of unwanted catch (30 studies): Seven of seven replicated studies (including one controlled) in the northeast Atlantic Ocean, North Sea, North Atlantic Ocean, Greenland Sea, Gulf of Thailand, Tyrrhenian Sea and the Skagerrak and Kattegat found that fitting rigid or flexible size-sorting escape grids, of various types and configurations, to prawn/shrimp trawl nets reduced unwanted fish catches (non-commercial species and discarded commercial species/sizes) by allowing the escape of unwanted sharks and the other fish species monitored. Two of two before-and-after studies in the Gulf of Maine and Pacific Ocean found that after the introduction of size-sorting escape grids to trawl nets in fisheries for shrimp, the capture of non-target and unwanted fish was reduced compared to before grids were used. Eleven of 20 replicated studies (including one controlled and 19 paired and controlled) in the Tasman Sea, Coral Sea, Gulf of Carpentaria, North Sea, Indian Ocean, Bay of Biscay, Skagerrak and Kattegat, Pacific Ocean, South Atlantic Ocean, Gulf of St Vincent and Persian Gulf found that prawn/shrimp trawls with size-sorting escape grids, of various types and configurations, had lower catches of all or all but one undersized or otherwise unwanted fish and shark/ray species monitored, and unwanted total catch (fish and invertebrates), compared to trawl nets without escape grids. Two found that escape grids reduced non-target catches of most sizes of whiting and plaice and larger sizes of total fish, but increased the retention of small cod and haddock. Three studies found a variable effect of fitting escape grids to shrimp/prawn trawl nets on unwanted fish catch compared to nets with no grids, and the effect varied with year, site and grid type. Three found that grids had no effect on the reduction of unwanted fish and catches were similar for all or most of the unwanted non-commercial and commercial fish species/groups and for the total unwanted catch (fish and invertebrates). The other study found that fewer unwanted fish of 10 of 11 species/groups were retained in a shrimp/prawn trawl net with an escape grid used in combination with a diamond mesh codend with the mesh orientation turned by 90°, compared to a conventional diamond mesh net with no grid. One replicated, randomized study in the North Atlantic Ocean found that the reduction in catch of unwanted sharks depended on the type of escape grid and shrimp/prawn trawl net used.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
