2008: Treat bats for infection with white-nose syndrome
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Various treatments for bats infected with white-nose syndrome have been suggested including antifungal agents, antimicrobial and enzyme inhibitors, and ultraviolet light. Some treatments have been tested on the white-nose syndrome fungus Pseudogymnoascus destructans in laboratories (e.g. Cornelison et al. 2014, Palmer et al. 2018), but we found only two studies that tested treatments on infected bats.
Cornelison C.T., Keel M.K., Gabriel K.T., Barlament C.K., Tucker T.A., Pierce G.E. & Crow S.A. (2014) A preliminary report on the contact-independent antagonism of Pseudogymnoascus destructans by Rhodococcus rhodochrous strain DAP96253. BMC Microbiology, 14, 246.
Palmer J.M., Drees K.P., Foster J.T. & Lindner D.L. (2018) Extreme sensitivity to ultraviolet light in the fungal pathogen causing white-nose syndrome of bats. Nature Communications, 9, 35.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects of treating bats with a probiotic bacterium to reduce white-nose syndrome infection. One study was in Canada and one in the USA.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Survival (2 studies): One randomized, controlled study in Canada found that treating little brown bats with a probiotic bacterium at the time of infection with white-nose syndrome (but not 21 days prior) increased survival within cages in a laboratory. One randomized, controlled study in the USA found that treating little brown bats with a probiotic bacterium within a mine increased survival for free-flying bats, but not caged bats.
Condition (2 studies): One randomized, controlled study in Canada found that little brown bats caged in a laboratory and treated with a probiotic bacterium at the time of infection with white-nose syndrome had reduced symptoms of the disease, but bats treated 21 days prior to infection had worse symptoms. One randomized, controlled study in the USA found that little brown bats kept within cages in a mine and treated with a probiotic bacterium had a similar severity of white-nose syndrome to untreated bats.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Bat Conservation
Description: Update 2020
