3332: Remove vegetation that could compete with planted non-woody plants: freshwater wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Removing other plants before or after planting desirable marsh or swamp plants could reduce competition for space, light and nutrients. Survival and growth of planted vegetation may be improved. Note that abundant competitors, and/or the absence of the vegetation to be introduced, could be symptoms of inappropriate physical conditions that may also need to be managed. Also note that existing vegetation may help to protect planted vegetation from extreme temperatures and sunlight, and protect the wetland surface from erosion.
To be clear, this action includes various specific actions that remove undesirable plants (e.g. physical removal, mowing, herbicide application) or kill undesirable seeds (e.g. burning, covering the soil with black plastic) in areas planted with desirable marsh or swamp plants. Management might be one-off or continuous. Evidence summarized for this action focuses on responses of the planted vegetation; studies that report responses of other vegetation are included in separate interventions elsewhere on this site.
Related actions: Introduce nurse plants before/after planting target marsh or swamp vegetation.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects, on emergent non-woody vegetation planted in freshwater wetlands, of removing competing plants. All three studies were in the USA. Two studies used the same experimental wet basins but planted different species.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Herb abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in wet meadows in the USA found removing an invasive species with herbicide before sowing mixed grass and forb seeds increased the total biomass of sown species after 1–2 growing seasons, but that burning to remove the invasive species had no significant effect on sown species biomass.
Individual species abundance (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in wet basins in the USA found that the effect of weeding to remove competitors on lake sedge Carex lacustris biomass and density, in the three years after planting, depended on the year and water level.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (2 studies): Two replicated, paired, controlled studies in wet basins in the USA examined the effect of weeding to remove competitors on the height of planted sedges. One of the studies found that weeding had no significant effect on the height of planted tussock sedge Carex stricta in three of three years. The other study found that weeding reduced the average height of lake sedge Carex lacustris in the first year after planting, but had no significant effect in the following two years.

OTHER

Survival (2 studies): Two replicated, paired, controlled studies in wet basins in the USA examined the effect of weeding to remove competitors on the survival of planted sedges Carex spp. Both studies found that weeding had no significant effect on sedge survival in at least two of three years. One of the studies found that weeding affected tussock sedge Carex stricta survival in the second year after planting, but that the direction of the effect depended on plot elevation.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
