902: Amend the soil using a mix of organic and inorganic amendments
Effectiveness rating: Beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Soil microbial biomass is the amount of tiny living organisms within a given area or amount of soil. Bacteria and fungi are typically measured in colonies (or colony forming units, CFU). ‘Residue’ refers to crop remains after harvest. High decomposition activity indicates healthy soil. The Shannon diversity index or diversity indices generally are a measure of how many different species there are in a given sample, and how many individuals are present in each species. See also ‘Amend the soil with manures and agricultural composts’ and ‘Amend the soil with formulated chemical compounds.’
 

Key Messages:
Biodiversity: Five controlled trials from China and India (four also randomized and replicated), and one study from Japan found higher microbial biomass and activity in soils with a mix of manure and inorganic fertilizers. Manure alone also increased microbial biomass. One trial found increased microbial diversity.
Erosion: One controlled, replicated trial from India found that mixed amendments were more effective at reducing the size of cracks in dry soil than inorganic fertilizers alone or no fertilizer.
SOC loss: Four controlled, randomized, replicated trials and one controlled trial from China and India found more organic carbon in soils with mixed fertilizers. Manure alone also increased organic carbon. One trial also found more carbon in soil amended with inorganic fertilizers and lime.
SOM loss: Two controlled, randomized, replicated trials from China and India found more nutrients in soils with manure and inorganic fertilizers. One controlled, randomized, replicated trial from China found inconsistent effects of using mixed manure and inorganic fertilizers.
Yield: Two controlled, randomized, replicated trials from China found increased maize Zea mays yield in soils with mixed manure and inorganic fertilizer amendments.
SOIL TYPES COVERED: clay, clay loam, sandy-loam, silt clay loam, silty-loam.
 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Soil Fertility
Description: Soils Synopsis
