3931: Produce coffee in shaded plantations 
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Coffee is often grown commercially in large monocultures, with no taller trees providing shade, often referred to as “sun-grown” coffee. However, as a perennial species which grows naturally in the forest understorey, coffee can also be grown among other, taller trees, which may or may not also provide a commercial product (“shade-grown coffee”). By retaining a more diverse forest structure, shade-grown coffee may allow a more diverse forest ecosystem to develop or persist, including communities of butterflies and moths. However, some species of moth, such as the coffee leaf miner, are a coffee pest, and growers may want to reduce their abundance (Borkhataria et al. 2012).
Borkhataria R.R., Collazo J.A. & Groom M.J. (2012) Species abundance and potential biological control services in shade vs. sun coffee in Puerto Rico. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, 151, 1–5.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of producing coffee in shaded plantations. Two studies were in Mexico and one was in Puerto Rico.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Richness/diversity (2 studies): One paired sites, site comparison study in Mexico found that a plantation with its original canopy but understory replaced with coffee had higher species richness of fruit-eating butterflies than one with its original canopy and understory replaced with coffee and other vegetation or those with canopies replaced with other shading trees and understories replaced with coffee with or without other vegetation. One site comparison study in Mexico found that shaded coffee plantations had a higher species richness of caterpillars than a sun-grown monoculture.

POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Abundance (2 studies): Two site comparison studies (including one replicated study) in Puerto Rico and Mexico found that shade-grown coffee plantations had a greater abundance of caterpillars than sun-grown coffee plantations. One of these studies also found that the abundance of coffee leaf miner was similar in shade-grown and sun-grown plantations.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
