2726: Fit a size-sorting escape grid (rigid or flexible) and large, supported escape openings to trawl nets
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Trawling is a method of fishing that involves pulling a fishing net (trawl) through the water behind one or more vessels. Trawl nets may be fitted with devices that aim to enable unwanted catch to escape (“bycatch reduction devices”). A wide variety of different devices have been developed, including size-sorting escape grids and supported openings, each designed to allow specific species or sizes to escape while at the same time minimising losses of marketable catch. Fitting escape grids in combination with a large, supported opening should increase the likelihood of fish escape by providing fish (potentially of different species or sizes) with an additional opportunity to make contact with one or other of the devices.
Evidence for the individual effects of size-sorting escape grids and large, supported escape openings in trawl nets is summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification - Fit a size-sorting escape grid (rigid or flexible) to a fish trawl net’, ‘Fit a size-sorting grid (rigid or flexible) to a prawn/shrimp trawl net’, and ‘Fit large, supported escape openings (such as Fisheyes, Bigeyes and radial escape sections) to trawl nets’. Similar interventions of various combinations of unwanted catch reduction devices, including escape grids, are summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification’.

Key Messages:

Four studies examined the effect of fitting trawl nets with a size-sorting escape grid and large, supported escape openings for fish escape on marine fish populations. Two studies were in the Gulf of Carpentaria (Australia), one study was in the Atlantic Ocean (USA) and one study was in the Persian Gulf (Iran). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (4 STUDIES)

Reduction of unwanted catch (4 studies): Three of four replicated studies (three paired and controlled) in the Gulf of Carpentaria, the Atlantic Ocean and the Persian Gulf, found that trawl nets fitted with a both a size-sorting escape grid and a large supported escape opening reduced the catches of unwanted fish and sharks and rays, but not sawfish, compared to standard trawl nets. The other study found that trawl nets with an escape grid/opening caught similar amounts of unwanted sharks to trawl nets without.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
