764: Use antifungal skin bacteria or peptides to reduce chytridiomycosis infection
Effectiveness rating: Unlikely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
The chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis infects the outer layer of amphibian skin. A number of bacterial species of amphibian skin have been found to inhibit the chytrid fungus in experiments (e.g. Harris et al. 2006; Becker et al. 2010; Lam et al. 2011). There is also some evidence that anti-microbial peptides, which are secreted into mucus and thought to help protect against colonization by skin pathogens, may provide some resistance to chytrid infections (e.g. Pask et al. 2012; 2013). It is therefore possible that adding such anti-fungal species or peptides to amphibian skin or to their environment may reduce the effects of the disease.
Becker, M. H. & Harris, R.N. 2010. Cutaneous bacteria of the redback salamander prevent morbidity associated with a lethal disease. PLoS One, 5, e10957.
Harris R.N., James T.Y., Lauer A., Simon M.A. & Patel A. (2006) The amphibian pathogen Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis is inhibited by the cutaneous bacteria of amphibian species. EcoHealth, 3, 53–56.
Lam B.A., Walton D.B. & Harris R.N. (2011) Motile zoospores of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis move away from antifungal metabolites produced by amphibian skin bacteria. EcoHealth, 8, 36–45.
Pask J.D., Cary T.L. & Rollins-Smith L.A. (2013) Skin peptides protect juvenile leopard frogs (Rana pipiens) against chytridiomycosis. Journal of Experimental Biology, 216, 2908–2916.
Pask J.D., Woodhams D.C. & Rollins-Smith L.A. (2012) The ebb and flow of antimicrobial skin peptides defends northern leopard frogs (Rana pipiens) against chytridiomycosis. Global Change Biology, 18, 1231–1238.
 

Key Messages:

Three of four randomized, replicated, controlled studies in the USA found that adding antifungal bacteria to the skin of salamanders or frogs exposed to the chytrid fungus did not reduce chytridiomycosis infection rate or death. One found that adding antifungal bacteria to frogs prevented infection and death. One randomized, replicated, controlled study in the USA found that adding antifungal skin bacteria to soil significantly reduced chytridiomycosis infection rate of red-backed salamanders. 
One randomized, replicated, controlled study in Switzerland found that treatment with antimicrobial skin peptides before or after infection with chytridiomycosis did not significantly increase survival of common toads.
Three randomized, replicated, controlled studies in the USA found that adding antifungal skin bacteria to chytrid infected amphibians reduced weight loss.

 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Amphibian Conservation
Description: Amphibian Synopsis
