3729: Translocate reptiles away from threats: Tortoises, terrapins, side-necked & softshell turtles
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Translocations are sometimes carried out to remove individuals from specific threats within their range, for example away from development areas (‘mitigation translocation’). Mitigation translocations may be carried out as a preventative measure to protect individuals but have been criticized for prioritising the process of removing individuals above establishing viable populations of translocated individuals in the destination location (Sullivan et al. 2014). A number of issues should be carefully considered before carrying out such translocations, including whether the proposed release site contains suitable habitat; whether the release of additional animals at an occupied site could negatively impact on the resident population; and whether a translocation alone can mitigate the impact of losing suitable habitat due to a development or other threat.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians. See here for: Sea turtles; Snakes & lizards; Crocodilians or Tuatara.
For studies where individuals are relocated for short periods to mitigate risks posed by temporary threats (e.g. habitat management) see Temporarily move reptiles away from short-term threats.
Sullivan B.K., Nowak E.M. & Kwiatkowski M.A. (2014) Problems with mitigation translocation of herpetofauna. Conservation Biology, 29, 12–18

Key Messages:

Nine studies evaluated the effects of translocating tortoises, terrapins, side-necked & softshell turtles away from threats on their populations. Seven studies were in the USA, one was in France and one was global.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (9 STUDIES)

Abundance (1 study): One global review found that when using recruitment to the adult population as a measure of success, mitigation translocations (both away from threats and moving problem reptiles) failed more often than those carried out for conservation or research purposes.
Reproductive success (2 studies): One replicated, controlled study in the USA found that desert tortoises translocated away from development areas produced a similar number of eggs compared to resident tortoises over 2–3 years. One replicated study in the USA found that eastern box turtles translocated away from developments and suburban areas reproduced successfully at the release site.
Survival (8 studies): Three of four studies (including three controlled studies) in the USA and France found that survival of desert tortoises or Hermann tortoises translocated away from developments was similar compared to resident tortoises for 2–3 years following release. The other study found that survival in the year of release of 74 gopher tortoises translocated away from a development was lower than for established tortoises from a previous translocation. Three studies (including one replicated, controlled study) in the USA found that eastern box turtles, gopher tortoises and desert tortoises translocated away from developments survived for varying durations over monitoring periods of one to five years. One study in the USA found that at least 20% of 106 gopher tortoises translocated away from a development site survived the over-wintering period and at least two did not.
Condition (1 study): One controlled study in the USA found that desert tortoises translocated away from an energy plant had higher body temperatures compared to resident tortoises in the first year after release, but similar temperatures in the next two years.

BEHAVIOUR (2 STUDIES)

Use (1 study): One replicated study in the USA found that 47% of eastern box turtles translocated away from developments or suburban areas established home ranges at the release site whereas 25% left the site. One controlled, before-and-after study in France found that Hermann tortoises rescued from a development and translocated in autumn took longer to establish home ranges than those translocated in spring.
Behaviour change (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the USA found that desert tortoises translocated away from developments moved more than resident tortoises.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
