753: Combine trap and repellent crops in a push-pull system
Effectiveness rating: Beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Push-pull systems involve intercropping the main crop with plants that are repellent to pests (the ‘push’) while also growing plants (trap crops) that are attractive to pests around the main crop (the ‘pull’). This combination of repellent and attractive companion plants keeps invertebrate pests away from the crop and may provide additional benefits through improved habitat and resources for natural enemies. Push-pull systems can also be designed to suppress weeds at the same time as controlling pests. Ground-dwelling invertebrates are frequently surveyed using pitfall traps – small pots buried in the ground up to their rim and left empty or filled with liquid preservatives or water.
Here we present evidence from 10 of 13 studies testing this intervention.

Key Messages:
Parasitism: Two randomised, replicated, controlled studies from Kenya found that push-pull cropping systems increased parasitism of stem borer larvae. One of the studies found no effect on egg parasitism. Natural enemies: Two randomised, replicated, controlled studies from Kenya and South Africa found push-pull systems had more natural predators, both in overall totals and the abundance of different predator groups. Pests: Two of three studies (two randomised, replicated, controlled) in Ethiopia, Kenya and South Africa found fewer pests. One study found no effect on pest infestation, but pests were scarce throughout. Two replicated, controlled studies (one also randomised) found fewer witchweeds. Crop damage: Two of three replicated, controlled studies (one also randomised) found less pest damage, but one study (where pest numbers were low) found effects varied between years and types of damage symptom. Yield: Four of five replicated, controlled studies (two also randomised) found higher yields and one found no effect. Profit and cost: Two studies in Kenya and a review found greater economic benefits. One study found higher production costs in the first year, but equal or lower costs in the following five years.
Crops studied were maize and beans.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Natural Pest Control
Description: Natural Pest Control Synopsis
