3736: Restore island ecosystems
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Islands account for approximately 5% of the earth’s landmass. They are home to high levels of biodiversity; however biodiversity is disproportionately threatened on islands compared to continental areas, with 61% of all extinct and 37% of all critically endangered species endemic to islands (Tershy et al., 2015).  Restoration efforts often incorporate multiple actions such as: native vegetation planting, removal of invasive species, beach restoration and translocating native or surrogate fauna to re-establish ecosystem function across the whole island. The outcomes of island restoration are often realised over long timescales and study results should be considered with this in mind.
This action includes studies that have carried out a large combination of different interventions to restore the whole island ecosystem, including both plant and animal communities.
Studies discussing the effectiveness of individual actions or actions carried out on only parts of an island are covered elsewhere. For example, replanting vegetation (Plant native species), removing invasive or problematic species (Threat: Invasive or problematic species), or species reintroductions (Species Management).
Tershy B.R., Shen K.W., Newton K.M., Holmes N.D. & Croll D.A. (2015) The importance of islands for the protection of biological and linguistic diversity. Bioscience, 65, 592–597.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects of restoring island ecosystems on reptile populations. One study was in each of the Seychelles, the USA and the US Virgin Islands.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Occupancy/range (1 study): One study in the US Virgin Islands found that following translocation to a restored island, St. Croix ground lizards expanded their range during the fifth to seventh year after release.
Reproductive success (2 studies): One study in the Seychelles found that following a range of interventions carried out to restore an island ecosystem, the number of hawksbill and green turtle nests increased. One replicated study in the USA found that during and after an island was rebuilt, diamondback terrapins continued to nest on the island.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
