2706: Decrease the circumference or diameter of the codend of a trawl net
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Trawling is a method of fishing that involves pulling a fishing net (trawl/seine) through the water behind one or more vessels. In many fisheries, particularly edible crustacean fisheries (e.g. prawns), trawls often retain unwanted small non-target or non-commercial fish species. Behavioural differences between species can be exploited to reduce the amount of unwanted catch retained in a trawl net. In trawl nets with a smaller circumference, the lateral openings of the netting mesh are larger than in larger circumference trawls, which allows more fish to pass through the netting (Armstrong et al. 1990). This may be due to different hydrodynamic pressures in the codend, which may stimulate a behavioural response in fish and contribute to their escape, which may not occur in crustaceans and other groups of species (Broadhurst & Kennelly 1996).
Related interventions describing other modifications to the overall design of different types or parts of trawl gear are summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification - Modify the design or configuration of trawl gear (mixed measures)’, ‘Change the size of the main body of a trawl net’, ‘Modify the design or configuration of trawl doors’, ‘Modify a bottom trawl to raise parts of the gear off the seabed during fishing’ and ‘Modify design or arrangement of tickler chains/chain mats in a bottom trawl’.
Armstrong D.W., Ferro R.S.T., MacLennan D.N. & Reeves S.A. (1990) Gear selectivity and the conservation of fish. Journal of fish Biology, 37, 261–262.
Broadhurst M.K. & Kennelly S.J. (1996) Effects of the circumference of codends and a new design of square-mesh panel in reducing unwanted by-catch in the New South Wales oceanic prawn-trawl fishery, Australia. Fisheries Research, 27, 203–214.

Key Messages:

Thirteen studies examined the effects of decreasing the circumference or diameter of a trawl codend on marine fish populations. Four studies were in the Tasman Sea (Australia) and three studies were in the North Sea (UK, Norway). Two studies were in the Adriatic Sea (Italy) and two were in the Baltic Sea (Denmark/ Germany). One study and one review were in the Northeast Atlantic Ocean (Northern Europe). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (13 STUDIES)

Reduction of unwanted catch (6 studies): Two of six replicated, controlled studies (three paired, and one randomized and paired) in the Tasman Sea, Adriatic Sea and Northeast Atlantic Ocean found that bottom trawl nets of smaller circumferences reduced discarded catch of fish in three of five cases and of total discarded catch (fish and invertebrates) in one of two areas, but not overall, compared to standard trawls. Two studies found that reduced circumference codends reduced non-target or discarded fish catch in three of 12 cases and for one of four species. The two other studies found that discarded fish catch was not reduced in smaller circumference codends.


Improve size-selectivity of fishing gear (8 studies): Four of eight replicated, controlled studies (one paired) in the North Sea, Adriatic Sea and Baltic Sea, and one review in the Northeast Atlantic Ocean, found that decreasing the circumference or diameter of the codend of trawl gear (bottom trawls and seines) improved the size-selectivity of haddock, Atlantic cod, whiting and European hake and red mullet, compared to larger circumferences/diameters. One also found the effect was the same across two codend mesh sizes, and one also found the effect was greater in diamond mesh with the netting orientation turned by 90° compared to standard diamond mesh. Two studies found that a decrease in codend circumference/diameter improved size-selectivity of haddock and saithe in one of two cases, and of one of three fish species. The other study found that a smaller circumference codend reduced size-selectivity of the gear for one of three fish species and was similar for the other two.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
