3387: Pay stakeholders to protect marshes or swamps
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Stakeholders could be paid to conserve marshes or swamps and the benefits they provide (e.g. wildlife habitat and carbon storage). This may involve protection of individual extant sites, or restoration/creation of sites to protect large-scale extent of marsh and swamp habitats. Participation is typically voluntary. Payments could be made directly or as tax incentives, could be paid as cash or as alternative lands, and could come from governments, non-governmental organizations or private sponsorship. Advice, monitoring and enforcement are often offered alongside payments.
Examples of payment schemes relevant to marsh and swamp conservation include the Wetland Reserve Programme in the USA (NRCS 2019), nationally or internationally funded agri-environment schemes (Keenleyside & Moxey 2011), and the Bio-Rights programme in which funding for community development is contingent on the community carrying out agreed conservation actions (van Eijk & Kumar 2009).
Studies that include, or aim to conserve, at least some marsh or swamp habitat are summarized as evidence for this action. Given the broad scale of this action, results may include other wetland habitats (e.g. peatlands and mudflats), aquatic habitats (e.g. rivers and lakes) or upland habitats (e.g. forests). Studies must quantify the overall effects of paying stakeholders, with some comparison of conservation activities with vs without payment (e.g. in management units enrolled on payment schemes vs not, states with payment schemes vs without, or times before vs after introduction of payment schemes). The following types of study have not been summarized as evidence of this action:

Studies simply examining vegetation within wetlands restored/created under payment schemes (e.g. De Steven & Gramling 2012).
Studies reporting uptake only (e.g. area of land contracted to payment schemes, or number of people signed up).
Studies examining effects of specific interventions carried out under payment schemes (e.g. abandoning land, rewetting, planting, or multiple interventions). These are included in other chapters.

Related actions: Adopt ecotourism principles/create an ecotourism site as a source of funding to protect marshes and swamps.
De Steven D. & Gramling J.M. (2012) Diverse characteristics of wetlands restored under the Wetlands Reserve Program in the southeastern United States. Wetlands, 32, 593–604.
Keenleyside C. & Moxey A. (2011) Public Funding of Peatland Management and Restoration in the UK – a Review. Report to IUCN UK Peatland Programme, Edinburgh.
NRCS (2017) Wetlands Reserve Program. Available at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/detail/null/?cid=nrcs143_008419. Accessed 6 December 2019.
van Eijk P. & Kumar R. (2009) Bio-Rights in Theory and Practice. A Financing Mechanism for Linking Poverty Alleviation and Environmental Conservation. Wetlands International, Wageningen.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the overall effects, on vegetation or human behaviour, of paying stakeholders to protect marshes or swamps. There was one study in each of the UK and Nigeria.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall extent (1 study): One replicated, before-and-after, site comparison study in the UK found that paying landowners to manage farmland ditches under agri-environment rules had no clear or significant effect on the frequency of emergent vegetation.
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the UK found that farmland ditches managed under agri-environment rules contained a similar number of plant species to ditches not managed under these rules.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE
 
VEGETATION STRUCTURE
 
OTHER

Human behaviour (1 study): One study in Nigeria reported that 58 communities with access to micro-credits for sustainable development changed their behaviour. In particular, they switched from livelihood practices that damaged mangrove forests to more sustainable practices.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
