3236: Deposit soil/sediment to form physical structure of brackish/salt marshes
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This action involves large-scale deposition of soil or sediment to form the physical structure of a marsh. This can be a cost-effective alternative to depositing sediment in upland areas or in the ocean (LaSalle et al. 1991). Soil or sediment could be placed directly where a marsh is desired, or placed nearby then carried to the desired site by water flows (Foster et al. 2013). Summarized studies could vary in the degree of landscaping of the newly deposited sediment.
Related actions: Deposit soil/sediment and introduce vegetation; Add sediment in relatively small amounts; Add upland topsoil; Transplant or replace wetland soil in order to introduce marsh vegetation.
Foster N.M., Hudson M.D., Bray S. & Nicholls R.J. (2013) Intertidal mudflat and saltmarsh conservation and sustainable use in the UK: a review. Journal of Environmental Management, 126, 96–104.
LaSalle M.W., Landin M.C. & Sims J.G. (1991) Evaluation of the flora and fauna of a Spartina alterniflora marsh established on dredged material in Winyah Bay, South Carolina. Wetlands, 11, 191–208.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of depositing soil/sediment to form the physical structure of brackish/salt marshes (without introducing vegetation). Three studies were in the USA and one study was in Italy. Two studies took place in the same marsh, but in different areas.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall extent (1 study): One replicated study in a lagoon in Italy quantified the area of vegetation on sediment deposited up to 19 years previously (average six years four months, with 61% vegetation coverage).
Community types (2 studies): Two replicated studies in coastal wetlands in the USA and Italy quantified the coverage of brackish or salt marsh plant communities on sediment deposited up to 19 years previously.
Community composition (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study on the coast of the USA reported that the composition of the plant community that developed on deposited sediment depended on the time since deposition and the elevation of the sediment. Areas of sediment that were of a similar elevation to natural marshes (or slightly lower) developed (or were developing) a similar overall plant community composition to the natural marshes.
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated study in an estuary in the USA reported that 1–2 plant species had colonized areas of deposited sediment after 4–8 years.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE
 
VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
