2970: Reduce intensity of livestock grazing: freshwater marshes
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Domestic livestock can directly consume vegetation, destroy vegetation by trampling, create bare patches of ground (e.g. repeatedly used tracks), affect water infiltration and flows by compacting soils, affect nutrient balance through excretion of waste products, and import seeds of undesirable plants (Morris & Reich 2013). Reducing grazing intensity might allow grazing-sensitive species to recover. However, maintaining some grazing may sustain a mosaic of short and tall vegetation patches, each favouring different plant species (Nolte et al. 2014). The effects of this action might depend on site conditions such as productivity (determined by soil moisture and nutrient levels; Berney et al. 2014).
To be summarized as evidence for this action, studies must have compared different grazing intensities, without completely removing livestock. Grazing intensity could be reduced by altering grazing duration (e.g. allowing livestock to graze for fewer days) or pressure (e.g. letting fewer animals graze, providing supplementary food as an alternative to living plants, encouraging grazing away from focal areas by feeding stations or shelter elsewhere). Comparisons must involve the same type of livestock and at least some overlap in the timing of grazing.
When interpreting the evidence, remember that the overall grazing intensity for a site does not necessarily reflect the local grazing intensity in wetland patches or in different vegetation types. Also note that “low”, “moderate” and “high” are relative terms within each study: they do not always refer to the same absolute intensity across studies.
Related actions: Use barriers to keep livestock off ungrazed freshwater marshes; Exclude or remove livestock from historically grazed freshwater marshes; Use grazing to maintain or restore disturbance; Use grazing to control problematic plants; Modify livestock farming practices in watershed.
Berney P.J., Wilson G.G., Ryder D.S., Whalley R.D.B., Duggin J. & McCosker R. (2014) Divergent responses to long-term grazing exclusion among three plant communities in a flood pulsing wetland in eastern Australia. Pacific Conservation Biology, 20, 237–251.
Morris K. & Reich P. (2013) Understanding the Relationship Between Livestock Grazing and Wetland Condition. Arthur Rylah Institute for Environmental Research, Technical Report Series No. 252.
Nolte S., Esselink P., Smit C. & Bakker J.P. (2014) Herbivore species and density affect vegetation-structure patchiness in salt marshes. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, 185, 41–47.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of reducing livestock grazing intensity in freshwater marshes (without stopping grazing entirely). Two studies were in the USA and the other was in Ireland. In all three studies, livestock were cattle.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community composition (1 study): One site comparison study in Ireland found that lightly and heavily grazed wet meadows contained a similar overall mix of plant species.
Relative abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the USA found that seasonally and continuously grazed ephemeral pools had similar cover of grasses relative to forbs.
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One site comparison study in Ireland found that lightly and heavily grazed wet meadows had similar overall plant species richness.
Native plant richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the USA found that seasonally and continuously grazed ephemeral pools experienced similar changes in native plant species richness over three years.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (1 study): One site comparison study in Ireland reported that lightly and heavily grazed wet meadows had similar overall vegetation cover.
Herb abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in the USA found that lightly and moderately grazed springs/creeks had similar herb cover.
Individual species abundance (1 study): One study quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. The site comparison study in Ireland reported, for example, that lightly grazed wet meadows had greater cover of black sedge Carex nigra, and lower cover of creeping bent Agrostis stolonifera, than more heavily grazed wet meadows.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (1 study): One site comparison study in Ireland found that lightly grazed wet meadows contained taller vegetation than heavily grazed wet meadows. Vegetation was measured in the summer, during the grazing season.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
