2133: Fit one or more soft, semi-rigid, or rigid grids or frames to trawl nets
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Trawling is a method of fishing that involves pulling a cone-shaped fishing net (trawl) through the water behind one or more boats. The net is wide at the opening and narrows to a bag or ‘codend’, tied at the end with a drawstring, where organisms are trapped. Trawl nets can catch a considerable number of unwanted organisms, including non-commercially targeted species and organisms under the legal-size limit. To reduce the amount of unwanted organisms, one or more soft, semi-rigid or rigid grids or frames can be fitted to the inner side of the net before the codend. This grid or frame is designed to prevent larger organisms, such as turtles or sharks, from entering the net/codend, while retaining the commercially targeted organisms (Brčić et al. 2015; Sala et al. 2011).
Evidence related to the use of grids in combination with other “bycatch reducing devices” are summarised under “Threat: Biological resource use – Fit one or more mesh escape panels/windows and one or more soft, rigid or semi-rigid grids or frames to trawl nets” and in combination with a modified codend under “Fit one or more soft, semi-rigid, or rigid grids or frames to trawl nets and use square mesh instead of a diamond mesh at the codend”.
 
Brčić J., Herrmann B., De Carlo F. & Sala A. (2015) Selective characteristics of a shark-excluding grid device in a Mediterranean trawl. Fisheries Research, 172, 352–360.
Sala A., Lucchetti A. & Affronte M. (2011) Effects of Turtle Excluder Devices on bycatch and discard reduction in the demersal fisheries of Mediterranean Sea. Aquatic Living Resources, 24, 183–192.

Key Messages:

Two studies examined the effects of fitting one or more soft, semi-rigid, or rigid grids or frames to trawl nets on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations. The studies were in the Gulf of Carpentaria and Spencer Gulf (Australia).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Unwanted catch abundance (1 study): Two replicated, paired, controlled studies in the Gulf of Carpentaria and in Spencer Gulf found that nets fitted with a ‘downward’-oriented grid but not an ‘upward’-oriented grid reduced the weight of small unwanted catch and that both grid orientations caught fewer unwanted large sponges, and that nets fitted with two sizes of grids reduced the number and biomass of unwanted blue swimmer crabs and giant cuttlefish caught, compared to unmodified nets.

OTHER (2 STUDIES)

Commercial catch abundance (2 studies): Two replicated, paired, controlled studies in the Gulf of Carpentaria and Spencer Gulf found that nets fitted with a ‘downward’-oriented grid or a small grid reduced the catch of commercially targeted prawns, compared to unmodified nets, but those fitted with an ‘upward’-oriented grid or a large grid caught similar amounts to unmodified nets.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
