2701: Modify gillnet or entangling (trammel/tangle) net configuration
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Gillnets are walls of single netting hung vertically on the seabed or in the water column, in which fish get stuck by their gills. Trammel and tangle nets (also known as entangling nets) are variations of the gillnet, used in a similar way, and may be single, double or three-walled nets in which fish or crustaceans will entangle. All of these types of net are commonly used in commercial fisheries and can be set at any depth on a range of bottom-types (Carol & García-Berthou 2007). They have floats on the upper line and weights on the bottom line and can be set anchored to the bottom or left drifting, free or connected to a vessel. Gillnets are considered as relatively selective fishing gears, in terms of fish species and sizes, but entangling nets will catch a wider variety of fish sizes. To help reduce unwanted catch, modifications to the configuration of gillnets and entangling nets may change how they fish in the water, allowing some fish to avoid capture. The behaviour of individual fish species may also influence how effective the net is at allowing escape.
Evidence for a related intervention is summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification – Use a larger mesh size’.
Carol J. & García-Berthou E. (2007) Gillnet selectivity and its relationship with body shape for eight freshwater fish species. Journal of Applied Ichthyology, 23, 654–660.

Key Messages:

Four studies examined the effects of modifying gillnet or entangling (trammel or tangle) net configuration on marine fish populations. One study was in each of the Gulf of Maine (USA), the Atlantic Ocean (USA) and the Adriatic Sea (Italy), and one study was in two estuaries in North Carolina (USA). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (4 STUDIES)

Reduction in unwanted catch (4 studies): Three of four replicated studies (one controlled, two paired and controlled) in the Gulf of Maine, Atlantic Ocean, Adriatic Sea and estuaries in the USA, found that modifications to the configuration of gillnets, including reduced height, increased tension twine diameter and mesh size and orientation, reduced the unwanted catch of cod in one of two net designs, discarded fish of commercial and non-commercial species, and the discards of non-commercial, but not commercial species (fish and invertebrates), compared to conventional configurations. The other study found that gillnet modification did not typically reduce unwanted shark catches compared to unmodified gillnets.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
