3955: Restore or create species-rich, semi-natural grassland
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
In marginal lands where agriculture ceases to be viable, traditionally managed pastures and hay meadows are frequently abandoned. This leads to an increase in scrub cover, changing the habitat from open grassland to early successional woodland. While this may encourage butterflies and moths which prefer more closed habitats (see “Abandon/fallow grassland to allow early succession”), it is detrimental to species which prefer open habitats.  This intervention covers the restoration of species-rich, semi-natural grassland from abandoned pasture or hay meadows, by clearing scrub and/or reintroducing low intensity grazing or mowing management.
For studies on the restoration of grassland from former arable land, “Restore arable land to permanent grassland”. For studies on the restoration of species-rich grassland from intensively managed grassland, see “Reduce grazing intensity on grassland by reducing stocking density”, “Reduce grazing intensity on grassland by seasonal removal of livestock”, “Reduce cutting frequency on grassland” and “Reduce management intensity on permanent grasslands (several interventions at once)”. For studies on the maintenance of species-rich grassland, see “Maintain species-rich, semi-natural grassland”. For studies on grassland restoration outside of a farmland context, see “Habitat restoration and creation – Restore or create grassland/savannas”.

Key Messages:

Six studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of restoring or creating species-rich, semi-natural grassland. Two studies were in Finland, and one was in each of Switzerland, Sweden, the UK and Germany.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the UK found that semi-natural grasslands restored by scrub clearance and the reintroduction of grazing or mowing had different butterfly communities to existing species-rich grasslands, and they did not become more similar over time.
Richness/diversity (3 studies): One of two replicated, site comparison studies in Finland and Sweden found that semi-natural grasslands restored by scrub clearance and grazing had a similar species richness of butterflies and burnet moths to both unrestored and continuously managed grassland. The other study found that semi-natural grasslands restored by cattle grazing had a lower species richness of butterflies and day-flying moths than unrestored and continuously managed grasslands. One replicated, site comparison study in the UK found that the species richness of butterflies on semi-natural grasslands restored by scrub clearance and the reintroduction of grazing or mowing remained similar over time since restoration.

POPULATION RESPONSE (5 STUDIES)

Abundance (5 studies): Two of five replicated, site comparison studies (including one paired study) in Switzerland, Finland, Sweden and Germany found that semi-natural grasslands restored by cattle grazing had a lower total abundance of butterflies and day-flying moths, and of 13 out of 32 individual species, than unmanaged, abandoned grasslands, but that three species had higher abundance, and three had lower abundance, on restored grasslands than on continuously grazed grasslands. Two studies found that grasslands restored by scrub clearing and grazing or mowing had a similar abundance of butterflies and burnet moths and heath fritillaries to unmanaged grasslands and continuously managed grasslands, although the abundance of heath fritillary adults and caterpillars was lower on restored grasslands than on continuously managed grasslands. The fifth study found that the density of blue-spot hairstreak eggs, and egg batches, was higher in grasslands restored by scrub cutting than in unrestored or continuously managed grasslands.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Use (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in Germany found that in grasslands restored by scrub cutting, a greater proportion of small buckthorn bushes contained blue-spot hairstreak eggs than in unrestored or continuously managed grasslands.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
