3719: Translocate adult or juvenile reptiles: Lizards
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Translocations involve the intentional capture, movement and release of wild-caught reptiles into the wild to re-establish a population that has been lost, or to augment an existing population. This can reduce the risk of inbreeding; help safeguard small populations from extinction due to catastrophic events and/or increase the occupied range. Translocations can also be used to move reptiles to areas where threats have been removed, such as islands where invasive predators have been eradicated. However, translocations are typically expensive and may risk spreading pathogens to previously unexposed areas.
Release techniques vary considerably, from ‘hard releases’ involving the simple release of individuals into the wild, to ‘soft releases’ that involve a variety of adaptation and acclimatisation techniques before release or post-release feeding and care.
This action includes studies which may combine different release techniques, but studies that explicitly test these different techniques are summarized separately under Use holding pens or enclosures at release site prior to release of wild reptiles; Use holding pens or enclosures at release site prior to release of captive-bred reptiles and Release reptiles into burrows.
This action includes the translocation of wild juvenile or adult reptiles. Relocations of eggs and nests, releases of captive bred individuals and releases of head-started individuals (reptiles of wild-origin reared in captivity prior to release) are discussed under: Relocate nests/eggs; Release captive-bred reptiles into the wild; Head-start wild-caught reptiles for release and Release reptiles born/hatched in captivity from wild-collected eggs/wild-caught females without rearing. For studies that release reptiles outside of their native range see Release reptiles outside of their native range.
Translocations that are carried out to mitigate against specific threats (for example translocating problem individuals away from a specific area, or translocating individuals away from development areas) are summarized under Mitigation translocations – Translocate problem reptiles; Translocate reptiles away from threats and Temporarily move reptiles away from short-term threats.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians. See here for: Sea turtles; Tortoises, terrapins, side-necked & softshell turtles; Snakes; Crocodilians or Tuatara.

Key Messages:

Seventeen studies evaluated the effects of translocating lizards on their populations. Six studies were in New Zealand, three were in the Bahamas, two were in Australia, two were global and one was in each of the Caribean, St. Lucia, Turks and Caicos Islands and Anguilla.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (16 STUDIES)

Abundance (10 studies): Three of four reviews that were global and in New Zealand and the Caribean reported that 13–32% of reptile or lizard translocations resulted in stable or growing populations (both wild-caught and captive bred animals). The other review reported that populations from eight of 13 iguana translocations survived for at least 5–20 years. Two of six studies (include one site comparison study) in St. Lucia, the Bahamas and New Zealand reported that translocated lizard populations increased over 3–10 years. Two studies reported that translocated populations remained stable for one and 6–12 years. One study reported that a translocated population declined over 1–2 years. The other study reported that a translocated population of iguanas survived for at least 40 years.
Reproductive success (5 studies): Two reviews that were global and in New Zealand reported that breeding occurred in 20% and at least 30% of lizard translocations (both wild-caught and captive bred animals). Three studies (including one replicated study) in New Zealand, Turks and Caicos Islands and the Bahamas reported successful reproduction in a translocated Whitaker’s skink population, a Turks and Caicos Rock Iguana population and one of two San Salvador rock iguana populations after 14 months to five years.
Survival (10 studies): Seven of eight studies (including one replicated, controlled study) in New Zealand, Turks and Caicos Islands, Australia, the Bahamas and Anguilla found that 40–85% of translocated lizards survived for at least 3 months to seven years or that no mortality was reported in the first year after release. The other study reported that at least one lesser Antillean iguana survived for at least two years. One review in New Zealand found that 9% of lizard translocations (both wild-caught and captive-bred animals) resulted in complete failure (no individuals survived). One site comparison study in New Zealand found that 1–2 years after a translocation of shore skinks, individuals representing three of four pattern types originally released still survived.
Condition (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Australia found that 67% of Napoleon’s skinks gained weight following release.

BEHAVIOUR (2 STUDIES)

Use (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Australia found that all six Napoleon’s skinks translocated to restored mining sites moved into unmined forest within a week of release.
Behaviour change (1 study): One replicated, before-and-after, controlled study in Australia found that provision of artificial burrows and supplementary food affected the use of bare ground areas by pygmy blue tongue lizard translocated into enclosures.

 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
