1860: Exclude wild herbivores using physical barriers
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Herbivores are animals that eat plants. Wild herbivores on temperate peatlands include deer, rabbits, hares, kangaroos, feral horses, feral pigs, grouse and slugs. Insects, monkeys and other large mammals are important herbivores in tropical peat swamps. Herbivores can damage peatland vegetation directly, by eating it. Herbivores can also have indirect effects on peatland vegetation. Large animals can trample and compact peat. Beavers, introduced to Tierra del Fuego, can flood existing peatlands when they build dams or drain peatlands through channels formed when dams fail (Grootjans et al. 2014). Wild herbivores could be physically excluded from pristine peatlands to prevent damage, or from damaged peatlands to let them recover.
Key peatland types where this action may be appropriate: bogs, fens/fen meadows, tropical peat swamps.
Related actions: exclude or remove domestic livestock, which may be the dominant herbivores on peatlands; use fences or barriers specifically to protect planted/sown peatland plants.
Grootjans A., Iturraspe R., Fritz C., Moen A. & Joosten H. (2014) Mires and mire types of Peninsula Mitre, Tierra del Fuego, Argentina. Mires and Peat, 14, Article 1.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects on peatland vegetation of physically excluding wild herbivores. The study was in a fen meadow.
Vegetation cover (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in a fen meadow in Poland reported that the effect of boar- and deer exclusion on vascular plant and moss cover depended on other treatments applied to plots.
Vegetation structure (1 study): The same study reported that the effect of boar- and deer exclusion on total vegetation biomass depended on other treatments applied to plots.
Overall plant richness/diversity (1 study): The same study reported that the effect of boar- and deer exclusion on plant species richness depended on other treatments applied to plots.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
