3655: Use prescribed burning in combination with vegetation cutting 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Prescribed burning may be used to reduce the chance of more extensive and damaging wildfires and to maintain and restore habitats historically subject to occasional wildfires. Using prescribed burning alongside mechanical cutting and clearing of vegetation may combine the multiple ecosystem functions provided by fire with the increased selectivity of cutting.
For studies that assess these actions separately see Use prescribed burning and Habitat restoration and creation – Manage vegetation by cutting or mowing.

Key Messages:

Ten studies evaluated the effects of using prescribed burning in combination with vegetation cutting on reptile populations. Eight studies were in the USA and two were in Australia.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (5 STUDIES)

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled, before-and-after study in the USA found that cutting vegetation prior to burning resulted in reptile assemblages becoming similar to areas with more pristine habitat and a history of frequent fires.
Richness/diversity (5 studies): Four of five replicated studies (including three randomized, controlled studies) in Australia and the USA found that areas managed by burning in combination with vegetation cutting had similar reptile species richness compared to either burning only, cutting only or areas that were unmanaged. The other study found that areas of woodland managed by burning and vegetation thinning had higher reptile species richness than unmanaged areas.

POPULATION RESPONSE (9 STUDIES)

Abundance (9 studies): Four of nine replicated studies (including five randomized, controlled studies) in the USA and Australia found that areas that were managed by burning in combination with vegetation cutting had a higher abundance of overall reptiles, lizards, eastern fence lizards and five-lined skinks compared to areas that were either only burned or unmanaged. Three studies found a similar abundance of overall reptiles, snakes and turtles compared to either burning only, cutting only or unmanaged. Four studies found mixed effects of burning in combination with vegetation cutting on the abundance of reptiles and six-lined racerunners.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
