3762: Alter incubation temperatures to achieve optimal/desired sex ratio: Tortoises, terrapins, side-necked & softshell turtles
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Incubation temperatures (for example warmer or cooler, constant or fluctuating) can influence the sex, size, shape, colour, behaviour, movement ability and post-hatching growth of reptile hatchlings and newborns (Booth et al. 2006). Practitioners carrying out conservation activities aimed at maximising hatching success, such as relocating eggs for artificial incubation or to on-beach hatcheries, will therefore need to consider the potential impact of temperature during incubation on hatchlings and populations. Human-induced climate change may also influence the sex ratios of some species of reptiles and limit the viability of populations over time.  It may be possible to counter the impacts of climate change on affected populations by managing temperatures during incubation to create appropriate sex ratios.
This action includes studies that test the impact of different temperatures on the sex ratio of reptile hatchlings or newborns. For studies that discuss the effectiveness of relocating nests/eggs for incubation more generally, see Relocate nests/eggs for artificial incubation, Relocate nests/eggs to a nearby natural setting (not including hatcheries), and Relocate nests/eggs to a hatchery. For studies that discuss the effectiveness of captive breeding more generally, see Breed reptiles in captivity.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians. See here for: Sea turtles; Snakes & lizards; Crocodilians or Tuatara.
Booth D.T. (2006) Influence of incubation temperature on hatchling phenotype in reptiles. Physiological and Biochemical Zoology, 79, 274–281.

Key Messages:

Eight studies evaluated the effects of altering incubation temperatures to achieve optimal/desired sex ratios on tortoise, terrapin, side-necked and softshell turtle populations. Four studies were in the USA, two were in Columbia and one was in each of Brazil and the Galápagos.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (5 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (5 studies): Four studies (including two replicated studies) in the USA, Colombia and the Galápagos found that hatching success of alligator snapping turtle, Magdalena river turtle, western pond turtle and Española giant tortoise eggs varied across the range of temperatures tested. One controlled study in Brazil found that Amazon River turtle nests covered with black plastic sheeting had lower hatching success than uncovered nests.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (8 STUDIES):

Offspring sex ratio (8 studies): Seven studies (including three replicated, randomized studies) in the USA, Colombia and the Galápagos found that hatchling sex ratio of turtles and tortoises was affected by incubation temperature, and that warmer temperatures resulted in more female hatchlings. One controlled study in Brazil found that Amazon River turtle nests covered with black plastic sheeting produced more female hatchlings than uncovered nests.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
