2347: Scare or otherwise deter mammals from human-occupied areas to reduce human-wildlife conflict
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
There is a variety of ways in which mammals in urban, residential or other human-occupied locations can come into conflict with people. Some species may raid garbage and create a mess while doing so, some may cause damage to gardens or parks, some may act aggressively towards humans and some mammals present substantial road traffic hazards. In many communities, there is a pressure to address these issues by focussing solutions on preventing or deterring mammals from accessing such areas. If non-lethal means can be successfully deployed, this could reduce incentives for achieving this through carrying out lethal control of such species.

Key Messages:

Ten studies evaluated the effects of scaring or otherwise deterring mammals from residential areas to reduce human-wildlife conflict. Six studies were in the USA, three were in Canada and one was in Tanzania.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (10 STUDIES)

Human-wildlife conflict (10 studies): Two of four studies (including one randomized and controlled study) in the USA, found that a range of noise and pain deterrents did not prevent black bears from returning to urban areas or other human-occupied sites. The other two studies found that such actions did deter them from seeking food at human-occupied sites. Two of three studies, in the USA and Canada, found that chasing nuisance black bears with dogs and chasing elk with people or dogs caused them to stay away longer or remain further from human occupied areas. The other study found that attempts to scare coyotes did not cause them to avoid human occupied areas. A before-and-after study in Canada found that an electric fence prevented polar bear entry to a compound. A study in Canada found that chemical and acoustic repellents did not deter polar bears from baits in most cases. A replicated study in Tanzania found that drones caused African savanna elephants to quickly leave residential areas.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
