3930: Plant wild bird seed or cover mixture  
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Wild bird seed mixtures are commonly sown as part of agri-environment schemes aimed at restoring bird populations. Seed mixtures can contain a wide variety of plants, predominantly annual species, and are therefore re-sown every one or two years. Some commonly used plants may provide beneficial resources, in particular nectar, to butterflies and moths.
Wild bird seed mixes are normally composed of annual plants, as opposed to perennial species sown in nectar flower mixes (Pywell et al. 2008). For studies on sowing these mixes, see “Plant nectar flower mixture/wildflower strips”.
Pywell R., Hulmes L., Meek W. & Nowakowski M. (2008) Creation and Management of Pollen and Nectar Habitats on Farmland: Annual report 2007/8.

Key Messages:

Seven studies evaluated the effects of planting wild bird seed or cover mixture on butterflies and moths. All seven were in the UK.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (4 STUDIES)

Richness/diversity (4 studies): Two of three replicated, controlled studies (including two randomized and one paired study) in the UK found that plots sown with wild bird seed mixture had a greater species richness of butterflies than wheat crop or extensively or conventionally managed grassland. The other study found that land managed under an agri-environment scheme, including wild bird seed plots, had a similar species richness of butterflies to conventional farmland. One replicated, randomized, controlled study in the UK found that plots sown with lucerne had a greater species richness of butterflies than plots sown with borage, chicory, sainfoin and fodder radish.

POPULATION RESPONSE (7 STUDIES)

Abundance (7 studies): Two replicated, controlled studies (including one randomized study) in the UK­ found that plots sown with wild bird seed had a higher abundance of butterflies than wheat crop or extensively or conventionally managed grassland, but that caterpillar abundance was lower in wild bird seed plots than either grassland. Two replicated, site comparison studies in the UK found that the abundance of butterfly and moth caterpillars in wild bird seed plots was similar to a range of other cropped and non-cropped farm habitats. Two replicated, randomized, controlled studies (including one paired study) in the UK found that farms with wild bird seed plots (along with other agri-environment scheme options) had a higher abundance of some butterflies and micro-moths, a similar abundance of macro-moths, but a lower abundance of other butterflies, than farms without agri-environment scheme management. One replicated, randomized, controlled study in the UK found that plots sown with lucerne and red clover had a higher abundance of butterflies than plots sown with borage, chicory and sainfoin.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
