3428: Add sulphur to soil before seeding/planting
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Adding sulphur to soils can increase their acidity (Neilsen et al. 1993). Alongside seeding or planting of grassland species, adding sulphur may increase the establishment and colonisation of plant species that are adapted to acidic conditions.
The studies detailed in this intervention are direct tests of the effectiveness of adding sulphur to soil before seeding or planting (e.g. by comparison with an untreated but seeded or planted plot). Studies that represent comparisons of seeding to unseeded plots can be found in the actions ‘Sow grass seeds’, ‘Sow grassland forb species’ or ‘Sow native grass and forbs’.
Neilsen, D., Hogue, E., Hoyt, P. & Drought, B. (1993) Oxidation of elemental sulphur and acidulation of calcareous orchard soils in southern British Columbia. Canadian Journal of Soil Science, 73, 103–114.

Key Messages:

Two studies examined the effects of adding sulphur to soil before seeding/planting on grassland vegetation. One study was in the UK and one was in the USA.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY (2 STUDIES)

Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One of two replicated, controlled studies (one of which was randomized and paired) in the UK and USA found that adding sulphur to soil before sowing seeds reduced plant species richness. The other study found no change in overall plant species richness.
Native/non-target species richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the USA found that adding sulphur to soil before sowing seeds did not alter the number of native plant species.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE (2 STUDIES)

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the UK found that adding sulphur to soil before sowing seeds reduced overall vegetation cover.
Sown/planted species abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the UK found that adding low amounts of sulphur to soil before sowing seeds increased the cover of three of six sown species.
Native/non-target species abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the USA found that adding sulphur to soil before sowing seeds did not alter the cover of native plant species.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Grassland Conservation
Description: Grassland Synopsis
