2699: Modify longline configuration
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Avoiding the capture of unwanted fish in longline fisheries or reducing the damage to hooked fish helps reduce fishing mortality and improve survival after release (Amengual-Ramis et al. 2016). Modifying the parts of a longline may make it more difficult for certain species or sizes to approach and consume the baited hooks.
Evidence for similar interventions affecting the capture of fish on hook and line is summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification - Use a different hook type’ and ‘Use a different bait type’. See also, ‘Deployment of fishing gear and mode of operation - Deploy fishing gear at selected depths to avoid unwanted species’.
Amengual-Ramis J.F., Vazquez-Archdale M., Canovas-Perez C. & Morales-Nin B. (2016) The artisanal fishery of the spiny lobster Palinurus elephas in Cabrera National Park, Spain: comparative study on traditional and modern traps with trammel nets. Fisheries Research, 179, 23–32.

Key Messages:

Four studies examined the effects of modifying longline configuration on marine fish populations. One study was in each of the Norwegian Sea (Norway) and Atlantic Ocean (Brazil). Two were global reviews. 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Survival (2 studies): One global review found that survival of unwanted sharks and rays at retrieval of longline gear was higher on nylon hook attachment lines instead of wire for two of three species and lower for one. One replicated, controlled study in the Atlantic Ocean found that survival of unwanted sharks caught on tuna longlines was reduced with nylon hook lines compared to wire.

BEHAVIOUR RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (4 STUDIES)

Reduction of unwanted catch (4 studies): One of two replicated, controlled studies in the Norwegian Sea and Atlantic Ocean and one of two reviews of worldwide longline fisheries found that modifying longline configuration (increasing the lead weight on mid-water longlines to increase the sinking rate or using nylon instead of wire hook attachments) reduced the catches of unwanted sharks and/or rays compared to standard longlines. One review found that longline modifications reduced unwanted shark/ray catches in one of two cases. The other study found that modified longlines did not reduce catches of undersized haddock compared to standard longlines.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
