3268: Transplant or replace blocks of vegetation: freshwater marshes
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of transplanting or replacing blocks of freshwater marsh vegetation. Three studies were in the USA. One study was in the UK.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in rewetted marshes in the USA found that plots of transplanted marsh vegetation contained a plant community characteristic of wetter conditions than plots without transplants after one growing season – but not after two.
Overall richness/diversity (2 studies): One replicated, before-and-after study in the UK reported that plant species richness within transplanted freshwater marsh vegetation was similar before transplanting and six years later. There was a temporary increase in richness after one year. One replicated, paired, controlled study in rewetted freshwater marshes in the USA found that plots of transplanted marsh vegetation contained more wetland plant species than plots without transplants after one growing season – but that there was no significant difference after two.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in rewetted freshwater marshes in the USA found that plots of transplanted marsh vegetation had greater cover of wetland plants than plots without transplants, after 1–2 growing seasons.
Individual species abundance (2 studies): One replicated, site comparison study in a wet prairie in the USA found that after three growing seasons, the density of prairie cordgrass Spartina pectinata stems was lower in transplanted sods than in pristine or source prairies. One before-and-after study of transplanted freshwater marsh vegetation in the UK reported changes in the frequency of individual plant species from before to six years after transplanting.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in a wet prairie in the USA found that after three growing seasons, prairie cordgrass Spartina pectinata was shorter in transplanted sods than in pristine or source prairies.
Diameter/perimeter/area (2 studies): Two studies (one replicated) in wet prairies in the USA found that the average area of small transplanted sods (≤0.28 m2 initial size) increased over 3–4 growing seasons. One of the studies transplanted larger sods (0.65 m2 initial size) and reported that their average area decreased over 3–4 growing seasons.

OTHER

Survival (2 studies): Two studies (one replicated) in wet prairies in the USA reported ≥90% survival of transplanted sods of wet prairie vegetation after 3–4 growing seasons.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
