3776: Head-start wild-caught reptiles for release: Tortoises, terrapins, side-necked & softshell turtles 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Key Messages:

Eighteen studies evaluated the effects of head-starting wild-caught tortoises, terrapins, side-necked and softshell turtles for release. Thirteen studies were in the USA, two were in Venezuela and one was in each of the Galápagos, Poland and Madagascar.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (18 STUDIES)

Abundance (1 study): One controlled study in Venezuela found that 57% of captured giant sideneck river turtles were head-started individuals.
Survival (13 studies): Two of three studies (including one replicated, controlled study) in the USA and Poland found that head-started European pond turtles and desert tortoises had similar survival compared to wild turtles or hatchlings released directly into the wild. The other study found that head-started northern redbelly turtles had higher survival than wild hatchling turtles. This study also found that in the first year of release, larger head-started turtles had higher survival, but in year 2–3 survival was similar for all sizes. Four of 12 studies (including nine replicated studies) in the Galápago, the USA, Madagascar and Venezuela reported that 50–100% of head-started individuals survived for three months to 1–5 years after release. Three of the studies reported that 6–43% of individuals survived for 1–3 years. Two of the studies reported that six of six, two of 10 and nine of 10 radio-tracked individuals survived 3–12 months. Two of the studies reported that annual survival was 80–100% or 3–100% in the year following release but 82–100% in subsequent years. The other study reported that some giant sideneck river turtles survived up to 14 years. Two studies also reported that survival during the captive phase was 91–100%. One study also found that more tortoises head-started in outdoor seaside pens died than did those from indoor pens. One replicated, controlled study in Venezuela found that survival of Arrau turtles during the captive phase was lower for turtles from relocated nests compared to those from nests that were not moved.
Condition (5 studies): One of two replicated studies in the USA found that two-year-old head-started gopher tortoises were larger at their time of release than two-year-old tortoises released in to the wild directly after hatching. The other study found that Agassiz’s desert tortoise hatchlings grew more slowly in captivity than tortoises in the wild. Two studies (including one replicated study) in the USA found that Alabama red-bellied cooters and wood turtles grew during 12–16 months in captivity, and wood turtles showed no signs of shell malformation. One controlled study in Venezuela found that the size distribution of released head-started giant sideneck river turtles was similar to that of wild turtles when newly released individuals were excluded.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Use (1 study): One study in the USA found that 81% of desert tortoises established home ranges within 13 days of release.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
