3716: Translocate adult or juvenile reptiles: Snakes
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Key Messages:

Fourteen studies evaluated the effects of translocating snakes on their populations. Seven studies were in the USA, two were in Antigua, two were global and one was in each of Canada, South Korea and Australia.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (12 STUDIES)

Abundance (6 studies): One of two global reviews reported that 15 of 47 reptile translocations (number of snake species not provided) resulted in stable or growing populations (both wild-caught and captive bred reptiles or snakes). The other review reported that the outcome of one indigo snake reintroduction was unknown. One replicated study in the USA found that five of 13 translocations of snakes resulted in established populations. Three studies in Canada and Antigua reported that 3–7 years after translocations of red-sided garter snakes and Antiguan racer snakes, greater numbers were counted.
Reproductive success (3 studies): One global review reported that breeding occurred in nine of 22 reptile translocations (of both wild-caught and captive bred animals). Two studies in Antigua reported successful reproduction in translocated populations of Antiguan racer snakes three years after release.
Survival (8 studies): Three controlled studies in the USA and Australia found that translocated timber rattlesnakes, northern water snakes and dugite snakes had lower survival than resident snakes, and in one study no translocated snakes survived a year. One controlled study in the USA found that ratsnakes held in captivity for 1–7 years before release had lower survival compared to snakes held for 7–18 days or resident snakes. Four studies (including one replicated, controlled study) in Canada, the USA and South Korea reported that 12–45% of snakes survived for three months to eight years after release.
Condition (1 study): One controlled study in the USA found that translocated northern water snakes had similar growth rates compared to resident snakes.

BEHAVIOUR (5 STUDIES)

Behaviour change (5 studies): Three of five controlled studies in the USA found that differences in movement and home range size of translocated and resident hognose snakes, ratsnakes and dugite snakes were mixed. The other two studies found that translocated timber rattlesnakes and northern water snakes had larger home ranges than residents. One study also found that translocated timber rattlesnakes had higher daily movements than resident snakes.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
