3714: Manage vegetation by hand (selective weeding)
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Many habitats depend on disturbances such as grazing or fire to reduce succession that leads to increases in woody plant species and conversion to forest. Manually removing vegetation may prevent succession and reduce shading.
Here we present studies that remove both native and non-native species. 
For studies discussing the effects of grazing as part of habitat restoration, see Manage vegetation using livestock grazing. For studies discussing the effects of managing vegetation by cutting or using herbicides, see Manage vegetation by cutting or mowing and Manage vegetation using herbicide.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects of managing vegetation by hand on reptile populations. Two studies were in the USA, one was in South Africa and one was in the US Virgin Islands.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Abundance (1 study): One replicated, paired sites, controlled, before-and-after study in the USA found that removing invasive, non-native Sahara mustard by hand had mixed effects on the abundance of two lizard species.
Reproductive success (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in the US Virgin Islands found that in areas where native beach morning glory was removed by hand, leatherback turtle nests had similar hatching and emergence success compared to areas where no removal took place.
Survival (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in the US Virgin Islands found that in areas where native beach morning glory was removed by hand, fewer leatherback turtle hatchlings became entangled in vegetation compared to areas where no removal took place.

BEHAVIOUR (2 STUDIES)

Use (2 studies): One replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in South Africa found that removing an invasive plant by hand resulted in more sites being used for nesting by Nile crocodiles compared to areas with no removal. One randomized study in the USA found that weeded or mown areas were used less frequently for nesting by Blanding’s turtles than tilled areas.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
