3778: Head-start wild-caught reptiles for release: Crocodilians
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Head-starting is a specialized management technique that raises early-stage reptiles (eggs, hatchlings and/or juveniles) to later life stages (juvenile, sub-adult or adult) in captivity before releasing them into the wild. Rearing animals beyond their most vulnerable stages may increase the chance of survival following release, and as such improve the chances of reintroduction success.
Here we only include those studies where eggs or juveniles were collected from the wild; for those that were bred in captivity see Breed reptiles in captivity and Release captive-bred reptiles in to the wild. See also Release reptiles born/hatched in captivity from wild-collected eggs/wild-caught females without rearing.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians. See here for: Sea turtles; Tortoises, terrapins, side-necked & softshell turtles; Snakes & lizards or Tuatara.

Key Messages:

Seven studies evaluated the effects of head-starting wild-caught crocodilians for release. Two studies were in each of the Philippines and Nepal and one study was in each of Zimbabwe, Venezuela and Argentina.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (7 STUDIES)

Abundance (2 studies): Two studies (including one replicated study) in the Philippines and Nepal reported that following releases of head-started crocodiles or gharials, wild populations increased in size over 8–9 years.
Reproductive success (2 studies): One replicated study in Argentina reported that released head-started broad-snouted caimans had similar clutch sizes and hatching success compared to non-head-started caiman. One replicated study in Nepal reported successful reproduction in all four rivers where head-started gharials were released.
Survival (5 studies): Three studies (including one replicated, controlled study) in Venezuela, the Philippines and Nepal reported that 88% of head-started Orinoco crocodiles survived 8–12 months and 53% of Philippine crocodiles or gharials survived for one year following release. One study also found that survival of Philippine crocodile hatchlings during the captive phase of head-starting was higher than for non-head-started hatchlings in the wild. One replicated study in Argentina reported that at least five released head-started broad-snouted caimans survived 9–10 years. One replicated study in Zimbabwe found that 38% of released head-started Nile crocodiles were recaptured at least once over four years. This study also found that hatching success of Nile crocodile eggs in the head-start programme was 74%, and that survival of hatchlings during the captive phase was lowest during the first year.
Condition (1 studies): One study in Venezuela found that released head-started Orinoco crocodiles grew at a similar rate to resident juvenile crocodiles.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
