3777: Head-start wild-caught reptiles for release: Snakes & lizards
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Head-starting is a specialized management technique that raises early-stage reptiles (eggs, hatchlings and/or juveniles) to later life stages (juvenile, sub-adult or adult) in captivity before releasing them into the wild. Rearing animals beyond their most vulnerable stages may increase the chance of survival following release, and as such improve the chances of reintroduction success.
Here we only include those studies where eggs or juveniles were collected from the wild; for those that were bred in captivity see Breed reptiles in captivity and Release captive-bred reptiles in to the wild. See also Release reptiles born/hatched in captivity from wild-collected eggs/wild-caught females without rearing.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians. See here for: Sea turtles; Tortoises, terrapins, side-necked & softshell turtles; Crocodilians or Tuatara.

Key Messages:

Nine studies evaluated the effects of head-starting wild-caught snakes and lizards for release. Five studies were in the USA, two were in Puerto Rico and one was in each of the Cayman Islands and Jamaica.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (9 STUDIES)

Abundance (2 studies): Two studies (including one before-and-after and one replicated study) in Jamaica and the Cayman Islands reported that the number of Jamaican iguanas found in the wild was higher after 23 years of head-starting and releasing compared to at the start of the programme and that there was a stable population of blue iguanas over four years during ongoing releases of head-started individuals.
Reproductive success (4 studies): Four studies (including two replicated studies) in Jamaica, Puerto Rico and the USA reported successful reproduction following release of head-started Jamaican iguanas (but not for 16 years) and Mona Island iguanas, and that timber rattlesnakes copulated or participated in pre-copulatory behaviour. One study also reported that 88–90% of Mona Island iguana eggs hatched successfully.
Survival (8 studies): Two of three controlled studies (including one replicated, randomized study) in the USA found that head-started plains gartersnakes and common water snakes were recaptured a similar number of times or had similar survival compared to resident snakes. The other study found that head-started northern water snakes had lower survival following release than resident snakes. One study also found that 76% of snakes survived the captive phase of head-starting. Three studies (including two replicated studies) in the USA and Puerto Rico reported that 22–40% of timber rattlesnakes or Mona Island iguanas survived for monitoring periods of eight months to six years. One replicated study in the USA found that head-started eastern massasaugas released in summer had higher survival than snakes released in autumn. One before-and-after study in Jamaica reported that 16% of Jamaican iguanas died during the captive phase of head-starting.
Condition (5 studies): Two of three controlled studies (including one replicated, randomized study) in the USA found that head-started northern water snakes and common water snakes grew more slowly than resident snakes. The other study found that head-started plains gartersnakes had similar growth rates to resident snakes. One study also found that head-started common water snakes had similar body condition to resident snakes. One controlled study in Puerto Rico found that body condition of head-started Mona Island iguanas was higher than wild iguanas before release, but similar at their first recapture after release. One replicated study in the USA found that more head-started eastern massasaugas released in summer gained weight before hibernation than snakes released in autumn.

BEHAVIOUR (3 STUDIES)

Behaviour change (3 studies): One of three studies (including one replicated, randomized, controlled study) in the USA found that head-started common water snakes showed similar behaviour to residents across a range of behaviour measures. One of the studies found that head-started northern water snakes had smaller home ranges and showed less surface activity than resident snakes. The other study found that head-started eastern massasaugas released in summer had larger home ranges than snakes released in autumn.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
