3525: Retain or increase leaf litter or other types of mulch
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
The presence of leaf litter is an important driver of reptile abundance in both temperate (Hu et al. 2013) and tropical forests (Heinen 1992). Adding leaf litter or other mulch to woody crops such as cacao may provide habitat for reptile communities.
For studies that leave woody debris after logging activities or add woody debris to the landscape see Threat: Biological resource use – Leave woody debris in forests after logging, and Habitat restoration and creation – Add woody debris to landscapes.
Heinen J.T. (1992) Comparisons of the leaf litter herpetofauna in abandoned cacao plantations and primary rain forest in Costa Rica: some implications for faunal restoration. Biotropica, 24, 431–439.
Hu Y., Urlus J., Gillespie G., Letnic M. & Jessop T.S. (2013) Evaluating the role of fire disturbance in structuring small reptile communities in temperate forests. Biodiversity and Conservation, 22, 1949–1963.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects of retaining or increasing leaf litter or other types of mulch on reptile populations. One study was in Indonesia and one was in Australia.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled, before-and-after study in Indonesia found that reptile species richness increased with the addition of leaf litter and decreased following removal of leaf litter and woody debris.

POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Abundance (2 studies): Two randomized, controlled studies (one replicated, before-and-after study) in Indonesia and Australia found that the addition of leaf litter or cacao husks resulted in a higher abundance of overall reptiles or skinks. One study also found that removal of leaf litter and woody debris led to a decrease in reptile abundance.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
