3772: Release captive-bred reptiles into the wild: Crocodilians
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Captive breeding is normally used to provide individuals that can then be released into the wild (often called ‘reintroduction’) to either re-establish a population that has been lost, or to augment an existing population (‘restocking’).
Release techniques vary considerably, from ‘hard releases’ involving the simple release of individuals into the wild to ‘soft releases’ which involve a variety of adaptation and acclimatisation techniques before release, or post-release feeding and care.
This action includes studies describing the effects of release programmes for captive-bred reptiles that do not specifically test the effectiveness of specific release techniques. For studies that compare specific release techniques see Use holding pens or enclosures at release site prior to release of captive-bred reptiles; Use holding pens or enclosures at release site prior to release of wild reptiles and Release reptiles into burrows.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians. See here for: Sea turtles; Tortoises, terrapins, side-necked & softshell turtles; Snakes & lizards or Tuatara.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects of releasing captive-bred crocodilians into the wild. Two studies were in China, one was in South Africa and one was a global review.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (4 STUDIES)

Abundance (2 studies): One global review found that when using recruitment to the adult population as a measure of success, 32% of reptile translocations/releases (releases of captive individuals were 7% of total projects) were successful. One study in South Africa reported that following releases of captive-bred Nile crocodiles, wild populations increased in size over 30 years, but then declined in the subsequent 15 years.
Reproduction (2 studies): Two studies (one replicated) in China reported that breeding or nesting was observed within four years of releasing captive-bred Chinese alligators.
Survival (1 study): One study in China reported that of nine captive-bred Chinese alligators, three survived for nine years and six survived for at least one year following release.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Use (1 study): One replicated study in China reported that after 10 years of releases of captive bred Chinese alligators to an area that had historically been occupied, 56% of constructed ponds were occupied.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
