3791: Bring threatened wild populations into captivity
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Sometimes it may be necessary to bring all reptiles from a single population into captivity, temporarily or permanently, as a last resort to prevent a species from becoming extinct in the wild. These captive populations are often called ‘captive assurance colonies’ (Buhlmann et al. 2012). Consideration must be given to maintaining captive assurance colonies as genetically-viable breeding groups in order to maximise the chance of the species surviving.
Buhlmann K.A., Hudson R., & Rhodin A.G. (2002) A global action plan for conservation of tortoises and freshwater turtles: strategy and funding prospectus 2002–2007. Conservation International and Chelonian Research Foundation, Washington D.C.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects on reptile populations of bringing threatened wild populations into captivity. One study was in each of New Zealand, Myanmar and Australia.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Abundance (2 studies): One of two replicated studies in Myanmar and Australia found that after bringing Burmese start tortoises into captivity the populations increased from 175 individuals to over 7,000 in 12 years. The other study found that Lister’s gecko and blue-tailed skink populations remained stable or grew over 4–5 years in captivity.
Reproductive success (2 studies): Two replicated studies in New Zealand and Myanmar found that after bringing tuatara and Burmese start tortoises into captivity, 44% of tuatara eggs hatched successfully in 16 years, and the number of hatchlings produced by Burmese start tortoises increased from 168 to over 2,000 in eight years
Survival (1 studies): One replicated study in New Zealand found that varying proportions of wild tuatara brought into captivity survived for 16 years.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
