3686: Protect nests and nesting sites from predation using artificial nest covers: Sea turtles
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Using temporary individual nest covers may be a preferred way of protecting reptile nests when predator removal is difficult (for example due to the predator’s ecology), or when it is considered to be unethical (for example involving controls on endangered species), unpopular (for example charismatic or native predators) or too costly (Buzuleciu et al. 2015).
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians.
For studies that use fencing to exclude predators from larger areas, see Remove or control predators using fencing and/or aerial nets.
Buzuleciu S.A., Spencer M.E. & Parker S.L. (2015) Predator exclusion cage for turtle nests: a novel design. Chelonian Conservation and Biology, 14, 196–201.

Key Messages:

Fifteen studies evaluated the effects of protecting nests and nesting sites from predation using artificial nest covers on sea turtle populations. Six studies were in the USA, two were in each of Turkey and Australia, and one was in each of Greece, Qatar, Indonesia, Cape Verde and Costa Rica.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (15 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (15 studies): Eight of 14 studies (including 10 replicated, controlled studies) in the USA, Turkey, Qatar, Indonesia, Cape Verde, Australia and Costa Rica found that sea turtle, loggerhead, hawksbill and artificial sea turtle nests with artificial covers were predated less frequently than nests with no covers. Three studies found that covering sea turtle nests had mixed effects on predation, depending on predator species or year. One study found that loggerhead turtle nests with artificial covers were predated more frequently than nests with no covers. One study found that olive ridley turtle nests with and without artificial covers were all predated. The other study found that predation attempts of green and hawksbill turtle nests with artificial covers were similar compared to nests with no cover, but that predation success was affected by the cover design. Three studies also found that sea turtle and loggerhead turtle nests with artificial covers had higher hatching success than nests with no covers. One study also found that loggerhead turtle nests with artificial covers had similar hatching and emergence success compared to nests with no covers. One replicated, controlled study in Greece found that covering loggerhead turtle nests had mixed effects on hatching success compared to nests with no covers.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
