3400: Sow grassland seeds from a local source
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Key Messages:

Five studies examined the effects of sowing grassland seeds from a local source on grassland vegetation. Two studies were in Germany, two were in the USA and one was in Italy.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY (2 STUDIES)

Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Italy found that sowing grassland seeds from a local source increased plant species richness compared to sowing a commercial seed mix.
Characteristic plant richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Germany found that sowing grassland seeds from a local source, along with increasing the number of species in a seed mix, led to an increase in the species richness of target plants.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE (3 STUDIES)

Overall abundance (2 studies): One of two replicated studies (including one site comparison and one controlled study) in the USA and Germany found that after sowing grassland seeds from a local source vegetation cover increased over time compared to areas sown with non-native seeds, but the density of individual plants declined. The other study found that vegetation cover did not differ to that in areas sown with commercial grass seed.
Characteristic plant abundance (2 studies): One replicated, controlled study in Germany found that sowing grassland seeds from a local source, along with increasing the number of species in a seed mix, led to an increase in the cover of target plant species. One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in Germany found that sowing grassland seeds from a local source increased the abundance of one of four characteristic plant species that were sown.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE (2 STUDIES)

Height (2 studies): Two replicated studies (including one controlled and one site comparison study) in the USA and Italy found that sowing grassland seeds from a local source did not alter vegetation height compared to sowing non-native grass seeds or a commercial seed mix.

OTHER (1 STUDY)

Survival (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled experiment in the USA found that sowing Sandberg bluegrass seeds from a local source did not change the survival of sown plants compared to sowing non-local varieties.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Grassland Conservation
Description: Grassland Synopsis
