3258: Directly plant trees/shrubs: freshwater wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Key Messages:

Seventeen studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of directly planting trees/shrubs in freshwater wetlands. Fifteen studies were in the USA. Two were in Australia. Two of the studies took place in the same site, but used different experimental set-ups.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community composition (2 studies): Two replicated studies of freshwater wetlands in the USA found that planting trees/shrubs (sometimes along with other interventions) had no significant effect on aspects of plant community composition, after 1–11 years. Specifically, planted and unplanted wetlands had a similar proportion of species in different plant groups and relative abundance of different plant groups.
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled, before-and-after study in depressional wetlands in the USA found that wetlands sparsely planted with tree seedlings contained a similar number of plant species, after 1–4 years, to unplanted wetlands.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (2 studies): Two replicated studies (one site comparison; one randomized, controlled, before-and-after) of freshwater wetlands in the USA found that planting trees/shrubs (sometimes along with other interventions) had no significant effect on overall vegetation cover (both ground and canopy, separately or combined) after 1–11 years.
Herb abundance (1 study): One study in a former firing range in the USA simply quantified herb cover approximately 1–2 years after reprofiling the site and planting trees/shrubs.
Tree/shrub abundance (1 study): One study in a former firing range in the USA simply quantified woody plant cover approximately 1–2 years after reprofiling the site and planting trees/shrubs.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Visual obstruction (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that swamps created by planting trees/shrubs (after reprofiling) had less horizontal vegetation cover, after 7–11 years, than nearby swamps recovering naturally from logging.
Height (6 studies): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that swamps created by planting trees/shrubs (after reprofiling) contained shorter woody vegetation, after 7–11 years, than nearby swamps recovering naturally from logging. Herbaceous vegetation, however, was of similar height. Five studies (four replicated) in freshwater wetlands in the USA simply quantified the height of trees and shrubs over 1–6 growing seasons after they were planted; in four of these studies, the average height typically increased over time.
Diameter (1 study): One study in a freshwater wetland in the USA reported an increase in the diameter of surviving trees over the year after they were planted.
Basal area (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that swamps created by planting trees/shrubs (after reprofiling) had a lower vegetation basal area, after 7–11 years, than nearby swamps recovering naturally from logging.

OTHER

Survival (15 studies): Fifteen studies (including eight replicated) in the USA and Australia quantified survival of individual trees/shrubs planted in freshwater wetlands. Survival rates ranged from 0% to 100% after 4–66 months. Seven of the studies (including six replicated) in the USA and Australia reported 0% survival of planted vegetation in at least some cases, after 1–6 growing seasons. Proposed factors affecting survival included elevation/water levels, the season of planting, protection from herbivores, root pruning, extreme weather, and if/how invasive vegetation was removed before planting.
Growth (2 studies): Two studies monitored true growth of individual trees/shrubs (rather than changes in average height of survivors). The two studies, in freshwater wetlands in the USA, reported that planted trees grew in diameter and/or height over their first 1–2 growing seasons.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
