3966: Use rotational mowing
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Key Messages:

Ten studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of using rotational mowing. Two studies were in each of the USA, the Czech Republic and Switzerland, and one was in each of the UK, Germany, Europe and Japan.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (6 STUDIES)

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the Czech Republic found that grasslands managed with “mixed management”, which included mowing parts of a site at different times and leaving some areas uncut, had a similar community composition of butterflies, but a different community composition of moths, to grasslands managed by complete annual mowing.
Richness/diversity (6 studies): Three of four replicated studies (including two paired, controlled studies and two site comparison studies) in Germany, Switzerland, Japan and the Czech Republic found that grasslands managed by mowing strips in alternate years, by mowing and burning one half of the meadow each year, or by mowing parts of a site at different times and leaving some areas uncut, had a greater species richness and diversity of butterflies than grasslands cut in full once/year. However, one of these studies also found that grasslands managed by mowing parts of a site at different times and leaving some areas uncut had a lower species richness of moths than grasslands cut in full once/year. The fourth study found that grasslands managed by leaving a rotational area uncut on each mow had a similar species richness of butterflies and burnet moths to grasslands cut in full twice/year. One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that rotationally managed grasslands, including some rotationally mown grasslands, which were last managed longer ago had a higher species richness of butterflies than more recently managed grasslands. One replicated, site comparison study in Switzerland found that farms managed with more in-field agri-environment scheme (AES) options, including staggered mowing dates, had a similar species richness of butterflies to farms with fewer AES options.

POPULATION RESPONSE (7 STUDIES)

Abundance (7 studies): Two replicated, paired, controlled studies (including one randomized study) in Germany and Switzerland found that grasslands managed by mowing strips in alternate years, or by leaving a rotational area uncut on each mow, had a higher abundance of butterflies and burnet moths than grasslands cut in full once or twice per year. One of two replicated, site comparison studies in the USA found that rotationally managed grasslands, including some rotationally mown grasslands, which were last managed longer ago had a higher abundance of butterflies than more recently managed grasslands. The other study found that rotationally mown grasslands had a lower abundance of butterflies in the second year after they were last cut than in the first year after mowing. One replicated, site comparison study in the UK reported that two heath fritillary populations survived on rotationally mown grasslands while six populations went extinct on unmanaged grasslands. One review in Europe reported that rotationally mowing grassland benefitted 27 out of 67 butterfly species of conservation concern. One replicated, site comparison study in Switzerland found that farms managed with more in-field agri-environment scheme (AES) options, including staggered mowing dates, had a similar abundance of butterflies to farms with fewer AES options.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Use (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the Czech Republic found that 29 out of 32 butterfly species preferred meadows which were half mown in June and August to meadows cut in full twice/year. The other three species were woodland species which only visited meadows temporarily.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
