3756: Breed reptiles in captivity: Lizards
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Key Messages:

Twenty-three studies evaluated the effects of breeding lizards in captivity. Ten studies were in the USA, three were in Australia, two were in the UK and one was in each of Switzerland, an unknown location, the Arabian Peninsula, Mexico, Italy, Spain, Bahamas and Jamaica and the USA.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (23 STUDIES)

Abundance (2 studies): One replicated study in Spain reported that a captive-breeding programme for large psammodromus lizards produced 365 juveniles for release over two years. One replicated study in Australia reported that captive populations of Lister’s geckos and Christmas Island blue-tailed skinks at two facilities grew or remained stable over 4–5 years.
Reproductive success (22 studies): Eighteen studies (including seven replicated studies) in the USA, Switzerland, an unknown location, the Arabian Peninsula, Mexico, Italy, Spain the UK and Australia reported that captive lizards produced one or more clutches of 2–21 eggs, 3–12 eggs/year or gave birth to 21 live young. Eleven of the studies reported hatching success of 45–96%. Three of the studies reported hatching success of 0–40%, 0–43% or 0–100%. One of the studies reported hatching success of &lt;10%. One of the studies also found that hatching success for Australian painted dragon eggs was similar across all incubation temperatures used, but higher for eggs laid earlier in the season. One of two studies (including one replicated study) in Jamaica and the USA and the Bahamas reported that captive breeding programmes lasting 19 and 24 years produced 73 and five Jamaican iguana hatchlings respectively. The other study reported that over 2.5 years, captive San Salvador rock iguanas produced only a single hatchling. One controlled study in the USA found that captive-reared western fence lizard females housed individually or in pairs produced more clutches with fewer infertile eggs compared to females kept in groups of four or eight. One replicated, before-and-after study in the USA found that curious skinks kept in smaller breeding groups and provided nutrient rich food produced more clutches of eggs than skinks that were kept in larger groups and given regular food.
Survival (9 studies): Seven studies (including four replicated studies) in an unknown location, Mexico, Italy, the USA and the UK reported that 4–23 captive-bred lizards, or some individuals, survived for six weeks or at least six months to three years, or that individuals of three species survived to reach adult size. Two studies in the USA reported that one of three and eight of 10 captive-bred lizards died within one day or 18 months.
Condition (1 study): One controlled study in the USA reported that giant horned lizard eggs incubated at 26.5°C produced larger hatchlings compared to those incubated at 28°C.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Use (1 study): One study in the USA reported that captive female Yuman fringe-toed lizards selected an 8:1 sand:water mixture when laying eggs.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
