3724: Use holding pens or enclosures at release site prior to release of wild reptiles
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Key Messages:

Seven studies evaluated the effects of using holding pens or enclosures at release sites prior to release of wild reptiles. Four studies were in the USA and one study was in each of Australia, New Zealand and the UK.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (5 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in New Zealand found that in a site where jewelled geckos were translocated into holding pens prior to release, more gravid females were found compared to a site where holding pens were not used.
Survival (4 studies): Two of three controlled studies (including one replicated study) in the USA and the UK found that gopher tortoises translocated into holding pens with artificial burrows prior to release or viviparous lizards released into an enclosure had higher survival (recaptured) or assumed survival (dug burrows) than individuals released without pens or enclosures. The other study found that translocating eastern box turtles into holding pens, or keeping them in pens for longer, did not affect post-release survival. One replicated study in the USA found that survival of Florida sand skinks within holding pens with different combinations of habitat features (trees, shade cloth, woody debris) ranged from 49–79% over two years.
Condition (1 study): One randomized, controlled study in the UK found that viviparous lizards released into an enclosure had similar body condition compared to those released without an enclosure.

BEHAVIOUR (4 STUDIES)

Behaviour change (4 studies): Two of three controlled studies (including two replicated studies) in the USA and New Zealand found that gopher tortoises and jewelled geckos translocated into holding pens prior to release dispersed away from the release site less frequently than those not held in pens. One study also found that the activity area of tortoises held in pens was smaller in the year of release, but similar in the year after release, compared to those not held in pens. The other study found that translocating eastern box turtles into holding pens, or keeping them in pens for longer, did not affect post-release dispersal behaviour. One controlled study in Australia found mixed effects on a range of behavioural measures of translocating pygmy bluetongue lizards into holding pens with artificial burrows for one day compared to five days.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
