777: Engage landowners and other volunteers to manage land for amphibians 
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Only 11.5 % of the world’s land surface is protected (Rodrigues et al. 2004). This means that it is vital to engage effectively with landowners so that they manage their land in ways that help to maintain amphibian populations. Volunteers can make a valuable contribution to the management of habitats for amphibians, on private and public land. In some cases the long-term success of habitat management can depend on the involvement of local people.
As well as the direct effects from habitat restoration, volunteer programmes help raise awareness about amphibians and the threats that they face. For example, a study found that participants with high levels of engagement in conservation projects learned more (Evely et al. 2011). For interventions that involve engaging volunteers to help manage or monitor amphibian populations see ‘Threat: Transportation and service corridors – Use humans to assist migrating amphibians across roads’ and ‘Education and awareness raising – Engage volunteers to collect amphibian data’.
Evely A.C., Pinard M., Reed M.S. & Fazey L. (2011) High levels of participation in conservation projects enhance learning. Conservation Letters, 4, 116–126.
Rodrigues A.S.L., Andelman S.J., Bakarr M.I., Boitani L., Brooks T.M., Cowling R.M., Fishpool L.D.C., da Fonseca G.A.B., Gaston K.J., Hoffmann M., Long J.S., Marquet P.A., Pilgrim J.D., Pressey R.L., Schipper J., Sechrest W., Stuart S.N., Underhill L.G., Waller R.W., Watts M.E.J. & Yan X. (2004) Effectiveness of the global protected area network in representing species diversity. Nature, 428, 640–643.
 

Key Messages:

Two before-and-after studies (including one replicated study) in Estonia and Taiwan found that habitat management with participation of volunteers increased natterjack toad and Taipei frog populations. 
One controlled study in Mexico found that engaging landowners in aquatic habitat management increased axolotl weight.
Six studies in Estonia, the USA and UK found that between eight and 41,000 volunteers were engaged in aquatic and terrestrial habitat restoration programmes for amphibians. Individual programmes restored up to 1,023 ponds or over 11,500 km2 of habitat.

 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Amphibian Conservation
Description: Amphibian Synopsis
