879: Restore wetland
Effectiveness rating: Beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Wetland habitats are often drained or degraded during the development of agriculture or expansion of urban areas or other land uses. Restoration of these important amphibian habitats can help to increase local amphibian species richness and abundance. 
Studies included here tended to investigate the restoration of wetlands using a combination of interventions. Studies investigating the restoration of individual ponds are discussed in ‘Restore ponds’. Study ‘ponds’ and ‘pools’ have been referred to as ‘ponds’ within this section.
 

Key Messages:

Seventeen studies investigated the effectiveness of wetland restoration for amphibians.
Ten site comparison studies (including eight replicated studies) in Canada and the USA compared amphibian numbers in restored and natural wetlands. Eight found that amphibian abundance, numbers of species and species composition were similar. Two found that the number of species or abundance was lower and species composition different in restored wetlands. One found that restored wetlands were used more or less depending on the habitat surrounding natural wetlands. One global review found that in 89% of cases, restored and created wetlands had similar or higher amphibian abundance or numbers of species to natural wetlands.
Seven of nine studies (including six site comparison and/or replicated studies) in Canada, Taiwan and the USA found that wetland restoration increased numbers of amphibian species, with breeding populations establishing in some cases. Three found that numbers of species or abundance did not increase with restoration. Two found mixed effects, with restoration maintaining or increasing abundance of individual species. Three replicated studies (including two site comparison studies) in the USA found that numbers of species in restored wetlands were affected by wetland size, proximity to source ponds and seasonality, but not wetland age.
Three studies (including two replicated, site comparison studies) in Taiwan and the USA found that restored wetlands were colonized by three to eight amphibian species. One before-and-after study in the USA found that three target species did not recolonize restored wetlands.

 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Amphibian Conservation
Description: Amphibian Synopsis
