835: Captive breeding frogs
Effectiveness rating: Trade off between benefit and harms
Background information and definitions:
Captive breeding involves taking wild animals into captivity and establishing and maintaining breeding populations. It tends to be undertaken when wild populations become very small or fragmented or when they are declining rapidly. Captive populations can be maintained while threats in the wild are reduced or removed and can provide an insurance policy against catastrophe in the wild. Captive breeding also potentially provides a method of increasing reproductive output beyond what would be possible in the wild. The aim is usually to release captive-bred animals back to natural habitats, either to original sites once conditions are suitable, to reintroduce species to sites that were occupied in the past or to introduce species to new sites. Some captive populations may also be used for research to benefit wild populations.
Amphibians possess a number of traits that make them potentially suitable for captive breeding programmes. They reach breeding age relatively quickly and are fertile and so captive populations can, in theory, be expanded quickly. Also their small body size and low maintenance requirements allow viable populations to be managed much more cost-effectively than many larger animals. However, captive breeding can result in problems associated with inbreeding depression, removal of natural selection and adaptation to captive conditions.
Studies in which amphibians were treated with hormones to induce sperm or egg release, or eggs were fertilized artificially are discussed in separate sections below.
Studies that investigate the effectiveness of releasing of captive-bred amphibians are discussed in ‘Release captive-bred individuals’. Those studies are not included in this section, unless specific details about captive breeding were included.
 

Key Messages:

Thirty-three studies investigated the success of breeding frogs in captivity.
Twenty-three of 33 studies, three of which were reviews and 30 replicated studies, across the world found that amphibians produced egg in captivity, in four cases by captive-bred females. Seven found mixed results, with some species of frogs or 17–50% of captive populations  reproducing successfully in captivity, but with other species difficult to maintain or raise to adults. One found that frogs did not breed successfully in captivity and another that all breeding frogs died. Seventeen of the studies found that captive-bred frogs were raised successfully to hatching, tadpoles, froglets or adults in captivity. One found that froglet survival was low and another that three species were not successfully raised to adulthood.
Four replicated studies (including one small study) in,Canada, Fiji, Hong Kong and Italy found that 30–88% of eggs hatched or survival to metamorphosis was 75%, as froglets was 17–51% or to adults was 50–90% in captivity.
One review and four replicated studies (including two small studies) in Germany, Italy and the USA found that reproductive success of frogs in captivity depended on temperature or a simulated wet and dry season, but not on whether frogs were housed in high or low maintenance facilities. Three replicated studies (including one small study) in Germany, Australia and Canada found that egg or tadpole development in captivity was affected by parental care, density or temperature.

 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Amphibian Conservation
Description: Amphibian Synopsis
