768: Sterilize equipment when moving between amphibian sites
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
The movement of field biologists increases the risk of spreading wildlife diseases such as the chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis. For example, the chytrid fungus has been found to survive in lake water for seven weeks and tap water for three weeks after introduction (Johnson & Speare 2003). Precautions therefore need to be taken to reduce the risk of spreading diseases between sites and populations. This is also the case within and between captive populations.
We found no evidence for the effects of sterilizing equipment when moving between amphibian sites on the spread of disease between amphibian populations. The studies captured here examine the effect of different types of disinfectants on amphibians.
There is additional literature examining the effectiveness of using a range of disinfectants to kill the chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis. Most chemicals killed 100% of chytrid zoospores when used at certain concentrations (e.g. sodium chloride, household bleach, potassium permanganate, formaldehyde solution, Path-XTM agricultural disinfectant, quaternary ammonium compound 128, Dithane, Virkon, ethanol and benzalkonium chloride; Johnson et al. 2003; Webb et al. 2007). Complete drying of the fungus or heating above 37°C for at least four hours also resulted in 100% mortality (Johnson et al. 2003).
Johnson M.L., Berger L., Philips L. & Speare R. (2003) Fungicidal effects of chemical disinfectants, UV light, desiccation and heat on the amphibian chytrid Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis. Diseases of Aquatic Organisms, 57, 255–260.
Johnson M. & Speare R. (2003) Survival of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis in water: quarantine and disease control implications. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 9, 922–925.
Webb R., Mendez D., Berger L. & Speare R. (2007) Additional disinfectants effective against the amphibian chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis. Diseases of Aquatic Organisms, 74, 13–16.
 

Key Messages:

We found no evidence for the effects of sterilizing equipment when moving between amphibian sites on the spread of disease between amphibian populations or individuals.
Two randomized, replicated, controlled study in Switzerland and Sweden found that Virkon S disinfectant did not affect survival, mass or behaviour of common frog or common toad tadpoles or moor frog embryos or hatchlings. One of the studies found that bleach significantly reduced survival of common frog and common toad tadpoles.

 
 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Amphibian Conservation
Description: Amphibian Synopsis
