2613: Remove or control predators
Effectiveness rating: Trade off between benefit and harms
Background information and definitions:
Predators can limit population sizes of prey species. Changes in habitat or land management can lead to increases in predator populations which might negatively affect prey. Removing or controlling predators, especially native predators, for the benefit of their wild prey species can be a controversial management strategy. In many situations, it is more likely to occur for game management than directly for species conservation. Nonetheless, there is potential for such management to lead to increases in the abundance, survival or reproduction success of prey species.

Key Messages:

Ten studies evaluated the effects on non-controlled mammals of removing or controlling predators. Seven studies were in North America, one was in Finland, one in Portugal and one in Mexico.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (10 STUDIES)

Abundance (6 studies): Three of six studies (including three controlled, one before-and-after and one replicated, paired sites study), in Finland Portugal, Mexico and the USA, found that removing predators increased abundances of pronghorns, moose and European rabbits and Iberian hares. One of these studies also found that mule deer abundance did not increase. The other three studies found that removing predators did not increase mountain hare, caribou or desert bighorn sheep abundance.
Reproductive success (2 studies): Two replicated, before-and-after studies (one also controlled), in the USA, found that predator removal was associated with increased breeding productivity of white-tailed deer and less of a productivity decline in pronghorns. However, one of these studies also found that there was no change in breeding productivity of mule deer.
Survival (5 studies): Two of five before-and-after studies (including two controlled studies and one replicated study), in the USA, Canada and the USA and Canada combined, found that controlling predators did not increase survival of caribou calves, or of calf or adult female caribou. Two studies found that moose calf survival and woodland caribou calf survival increased with predator control. The other study found mixed results with increases in white-tailed deer calf survival in some but not all years with predator control.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
