2464: Release translocated/captive-bred mammals to islands without invasive predators
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Mammals are sometimes wild-caught and translocated or bred in captivity and released to islands that are free of invasive predators to give them the best chance of establishing breeding populations and persisting. These could either be islands that have never had non-native predators introduced to them or those from which non-native predators have been eradicated.
See also: Release translocated/captive-bred mammals in areas with invasive/problematic species eradication/control.

Key Messages:

Six studies evaluated the effects of releasing translocated or captive-bred mammals to islands without invasive predators. The six studies were in Australia.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (7 STUDIES)

Abundance (2 studies): A study in Australia found that following release of captive-bred dibblers on to an island free of introduced predators, numbers increased. A replicated study in Australia found that following release of captive-bred and wild-born brush-tailed bettong onto islands free of foxes or cats, numbers increased on two of four islands.
Reproductive success (3 studies): A study in Australia found that captive-bred proserpine rock-wallabies released on an island without introduced predators established a breeding population. Two studies in Australia found that following release on to islands without invasive predators, captive-bred rufous hare-wallabies and captive-bred dibblers.
Survival (3 studies): A review of 28 translocation studies in Australia found that 67% of marsupial populations translocated to islands without predators survived more than five years, compared to 0% translocated to islands with predators and 20% translocated to the mainland. A study in Australia found that most captive-bred rufous hare-wallabies released on an island without non-native predators survived more than a year. A replicated study in Australia found that wild-born golden bandicoots descended from translocated populations released onto two predator-free islands persisted for 2–3 years.
Condition (1 study): A replicated study in Australia found that wild-born golden bandicoots descended from translocated populations that had been released onto two predator-free islands, maintained genetic diversity relative to founder and source populations.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
