2352: Rehabilitate injured, sick or weak mammals
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Mammals that are injured, sick or found in a weak condition are sometimes taken in by wildlife rehabilitators, to be treated and released back into the wild. Often, this is done more for animal welfare reasons than for species conservation though, for rare species, release of such animals may provide opportunities for choosing where to augment populations. The success of such programmes can be difficult to judge, without benchmark data for survival of wild-reared mammals. It is also important to note that the majority of studies summarised below have very small sample sizes, and that unsuccessful attempts are less likely to have been reported.

Key Messages:

Thirteen studies evaluated the effects of rehabilitating injured, sick or weak mammals. Four studies were in the UK, three were in Spain, two were in Argentina and one each was in Uganda, Australia, the USA and Brazil.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (12 STUDIES)

Survival (11 studies): Five studies, in the UK and Spain, found that varying proportions of European hedgehogs released after being rehabilitated in captivity survived during post-release monitoring periods, which ranged from two weeks to 136 days. Five studies, in Australia, Spain, the USA and Brazil, found that four koalas, an Iberian lynx, a gray wolf, a puma and two brown bears released following rehabilitation in captivity survived for varying durations during monitoring periods, which ranged in length from three months to up to seven years. A study in Argentina found that over half of released rehabilitated and captive-reared giant anteaters survived for at least six months.
Condition (2 studies): A study in Uganda found that a snare wound in a white rhinoceros healed after treatment and rehabilitation. A study in the UK found that two of three rehabilitated European hedgehogs lost 12-36% of their body weight after release into the wild.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)
Behaviour change (1 study): A controlled study in Argentina found that released wild-born rehabilitated giant anteaters were more nocturnal in their activity patterns than captive-bred individuals.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
