2525: Install fences around existing culverts or underpasses under roads/railways
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Culverts are often installed under roads to aid or enable drainage whilst underpasses enable movement of traffic or apparatus such as farming machinery. Such passages are sometimes used by animals to make road crossings but many animals may nonetheless cross over the road surface and are then at risk of collision with vehicles. This intervention includes studies where fences are installed or extended specifically in a way designed to encourage animals to use existing passages rather than crossing over the road surface. It includes only studies that specifically assess the effectiveness of fencing in a way that can be separated from that of underpasses. For situations where roadside fencing is installed specifically to prevent animal access to roads, in some cases along with underpasses as part of an integrated road casualty reduction scheme, see Install barrier fencing along roads. See also Install barrier fencing and underpasses along roads for studies that assess the combined effectiveness of installing fending and underpasses.
See also: Install tunnels/culverts/underpass under railways and Install tunnels/culverts/underpass under roads.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects on mammals of installing fences around existing culverts under roads/railways. Two studies were in the USA one was in Portugal and one was in South Africa.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Survival (3 studies): Two out of three before-and-after studies (including a controlled and a site comparison study), in the USA, Portugal and South Africa, found that installing or enhancing roadside fencing alongside existing culverts reduced mammal road mortality whilst one study found that such fences did not alter mammal road mortality.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Use (1 study): A replicated, randomized, controlled, before-and-after study in the USA found that fences installed to funnel animals to existing culverts did not increase culvert use by bobcats.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
