3108: Use cutting to control problematic large trees/shrubs: freshwater marshes
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of cutting down problematic large trees/shrubs in freshwater marshes. One study was in the UK and one was in the USA.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall extent (1 study): One study of a dune slack in the UK reported an increase in total vegetation coverage between one and two years after clearing scrub (by cutting and applying herbicide).
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): The same study reported a small increase in total plant richness between one and two years after clearing scrub (by cutting and applying herbicide).
Characteristic plant richness/diversity (1 study): The same study reported an increase in the number of slack-characteristic plant species present between one and two years after clearing scrub (by cutting and applying herbicide).
Native/non-target richness/diversity (1 study): The same study reported an increase in native plant richness between one and two years after clearing scrub (by cutting and applying herbicide).

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Individual species abundance (1 study): One study quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species, other than the species being controlled. The site comparison study in the USA found that tussock sedge Carex stricta was less dense in a wet meadow restored by removing trees (along with other interventions, including planting sedges) than in nearby natural meadows, after 11–14 years.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (1 study): One site comparison study in the USA reported that sedge tussocks were shorter in a wet meadow restored by removing trees (along with other interventions, including planting sedges) than in nearby natural meadows, after 11–14 years.
Diameter/perimeter/area (1 study): The same study reported that sedge tussocks had a smaller perimeter in a wet meadow restored by removing trees (along with other interventions, including planting sedges) than in nearby natural meadows, after 11–14 years.
Basal area (1 study): The same study reported that the basal area of sedge tussocks was smaller in a wet meadow restored by removing trees (along with other interventions, including planting sedges) than in nearby natural meadows, after 11–14 years.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
