3037: Facilitate tidal exchange to restore degraded brackish/saline swamps
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of facilitating tidal exchange to restore degraded brackish/saline swamps. Three studies were in Mexico and one was in India.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall extent (2 studies): Two before-and-after studies on the coasts of India and Mexico reported that the area of mangrove forest in each site was greater 5–6 years after restoring tidal exchange (sometimes along with planting mangrove seedlings) than in the years before.
Community composition (1 study): One before-and-after study of a mangrove forest in Mexico reported that the tree community composition was identical before and five years after restoring tidal exchange: the same three tree species were present at both times.
Community types (1 study): One before-and-after study of a mangrove forest in Mexico reported that the relative coverage of stands dominated by each of three tree species was similar before and five years after restoring tidal exchange.
Tree/shrub richness/diversity (2 studies): One site comparison study in Mexico reported that a tidally restored mangrove forest contained a similar number of tree species to nearby natural mangroves, after 10–11 years. One before-and-after study in Mexico reported identical tree species richness in a mangrove forest before and five years after restoring tidal exchange.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Tree/shrub abundance (2 studies): Two site comparison studies in Mexico reported that tidally restored mangrove forests contained a lower density of trees or seedlings than nearby natural mangroves.
Individual species abundance (1 study): One site comparison study in Mexico compared the abundance of three mangrove tree species in a tidally restored area and nearby natural forests (see original paper for data).

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (2 studies): One site comparison study in Mexico reported that trees in a tidally restored mangrove forest were a similar height to trees in nearby natural mangroves, after 10–11 years. Another replicated, site comparison study in Mexico reported that seedlings in a tidally restored mangrove forest were taller than seedlings in a nearby natural mangrove.
Diameter (1 study): One site comparison study in Mexico reported that trees in a tidally restored mangrove forest had a similar diameter to trees in nearby natural mangroves, after 10–11 years.
Basal area (1 study): One site comparison study in Mexico reported that trees in a tidally restored mangrove forest had a smaller basal area than trees in natural mangroves, after 10–11 years.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
