3215: Reprofile/relandscape: freshwater swamps
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of reprofiling or relandscaping to restore or create freshwater swamps. Both studies were in the USA.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that swamps created by reprofiling uplands (along with planting trees/shrubs) contained a similar proportion of tree species in different plant groups, after 7–11 years, to nearby swamps recovering naturally from logging.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that swamps created by reprofiling uplands (along with planting trees/shrubs) had similar ground and canopy cover, after 7–11 years, to nearby swamps recovering naturally from logging.
Herb abundance (1 study): One study in a former firing range in the USA simply quantified herb cover approximately 1–2 years after reprofiling the site (and planting trees/shrubs).
Tree/shrub abundance (1 study): One study in a former firing range in the USA simply quantified woody plant cover approximately 1–2 years after reprofiling the site (and planting trees/shrubs).

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Visual obstruction (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that swamps created by reprofiling uplands (along with planting trees/shrubs) had less horizontal vegetation cover, after 7–11 years, than nearby swamps recovering naturally from logging.
Height (1 study): The same study found that swamps created by reprofiling uplands (along with planting trees/shrubs) contained shorter woody vegetation, after 7–11 years, than nearby swamps recovering naturally from logging. Herbaceous vegetation, however, was of similar height in both created and naturally recovering swamps.
Basal area (1 study): The same study found that swamps created by reprofiling uplands (along with planting trees/shrubs) had a lower vegetation basal area, after 7–11 years, than nearby swamps recovering naturally from logging.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
