2965: Use barriers to keep livestock off ungrazed brackish/saline swamps
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
This action involves excluding livestock – with physical barriers such as fences or hedgerows, or virtual barriers involving GPS trackers and negative sounds or electric shocks (SRUC 2015) – from an area of natural, ungrazed marsh or swamp. Here, “ungrazed” refers to the recent history of a site, so studies of sites that have not been recently grazed and so have regained their natural ecological character would also be included here.
Domestic livestock can directly consume vegetation, destroy vegetation by trampling, create bare patches of ground (e.g. repeatedly used tracks), affect water infiltration and flows by compacting soils, affect nutrient balance through excretion of waste products, and import seeds of undesirable plants (Morris & Reich 2013).
Related actions: Exclude or remove livestock from historically grazed brackish/saline swamps; Use grazing to maintain or restore disturbance; Use grazing to control problematic plants; Exclude wild vertebrates; Use fences or barriers to protect planted areas.
Morris K. & Reich P. (2013) Understanding the Relationship Between Livestock Grazing and Wetland Condition. Arthur Rylah Institute for Environmental Research, Technical Report Series No. 252.
SRUC (2015) Virtual Fencing Systems for Livestock. Available at https://www.sruc.ac.uk/download/downloads/id/3128/virtual_fencing_systems_for_livestock.pdf. Accessed 7 January 2020.

Key Messages:
We found no studies that evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of using barriers to keep livestock off brackish/saline swamps that have never (or not recently) been grazed.
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
