3014: Provide new technologies to reduce harvesting pressure on vegetation
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Providing new, efficient technologies to people who live in or near marshes or swamps could reduce pressure on wild biological resources. More efficient equipment would use less of the natural resource, reducing the amount that needs to be harvested. For example, fuel-efficient fish-smoking systems installed in Cameroon could reduce the demand for wood, which is largely extracted from mangroves (Feka et al. 2010). New technologies might also have health benefits, such as the production of less, or less harmful, smoke.
To be included as evidence for this action, studies must have quantified the effects of new technologies on marsh or swamp vegetation or human behaviours that threaten it (e.g. the amount of wood harvested). Studies that simply monitor the technologies (e.g. the amount of wood consumed by stoves of different designs) are not included as evidence.
Related actions: Designate protected area and Provide general protection for marshes or swamps, including arrangements that allow sustainable use.
Feka N.Z., Chuyong G.B. & Ajonina G.N. (2010) Sustainable utilization of mangroves using improved fish-smoking systems: a management perspective from the Douala-Edea Wildlife Reserve, Cameroon. Tropical Conservation Science, 2, 450–468.

Key Messages:
We found no studies that evaluated the effects, on vegetation or human behaviour, of providing new technologies to reduce harvesting pressure on vegetation in marshes or swamps.
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
