1068: Ponto-Caspian gobies: Using a combination of netting and electrofishing
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Applying a combination of netting and electrofishing may prove particularly effective in controlling populations of invasive gobies.  Studies have shown this to be effective for other fish species.  For example, two before-and-after studies in Australia and the UK found that electrofishing and gill netting combined were effective at reducing topmouth gudgeon Pseudorasbora parva populations (Pinto et al. 2005; Copp et al. 2007). Also, a replicated, paired sites study in the USA demonstrated that gill netting and electrofishing reduced or eradicated non-native trout (Oncorhynchus species, Salmo species, and Salvelinus species), and facilitated a partial reversal in the decline in yellow-legged frog Rana muscosa (Knapp et al. 2007).
Copp G.H., Wesley K.J., Verreycken H. & Russell I.C. (2007) When an ‘invasive’ fish species fails to invade! Example of the topmouth gudgeon Pseudorasbora parva. Aquatic Invasions, 2, 107-112.
Knapp R.A., Boiano D.M. & Vredenburg V.T. (2007) Removal of nonnative fish results in population expansion of a declining amphibian (mountain yellow-legged frog, Rana muscosa). Biological Conservation, 135, 11-20.
Pinto L., Chandrasena N., Pera J., Hawkins P., Eccles D. & Sim R. (2005) Managing invasive carp (Cyprinus carpio L.) for habitat enhancement at Botany Wetlands, Australia. Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems, 15, 447-462.

Key Messages:

No evidence was captured on the use of a combination of electrofishing and gill netting to control goby populations.

'No evidence' for an action means we have not yet found any studies that directly and quantitatively tested this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.
 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species
Description: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species Synopsis
