3172: Modify aquaculture practices in watershed to reduce pollution
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Nutrients from aquaculture stock can spill over into focal marshes or swamps, causing pollution problems. This includes nutrients in excretory products from the animals themselves, as well as in excess food (Dauda et al. 2019). An excess of nutrients in marshes and swamps can affect the plant community composition, plant diversity and distribution of plant species (Verhoeven et al. 2006; Bromberg Gedan et al. 2009). Extreme excesses can cause algal blooms.
This action includes a range of specific management techniques, other than changes in fertilizer or herbicide use, that might reduce pollution in focal marshes or swamps from aquacultural facilities elsewhere in the catchments. These interventions include: completely excluding or removing stock, reducing aquacultural intensity (by reducing frequency and/or degree of stocking), or better management of feed (altering the amount and/or timing).
Related actions: Abandon aquaculture facilities within focal wetlands (freshwater – brackish/saline).
Bromberg Gedan K., Silliman B.R. & Bertness M.D. (2009) Centuries of human-driven change in salt marsh ecosystems. Annual Review of Marine Science, 1, 117–141.
Dauda A., Ajadi A., Tola-Fabunmi A.S. & Akinwole A.O. (2019) Waste production in aquaculture: sources, components and managements in different culture systems. Aquaculture and Fisheries, 4, 81–88.
Verhoeven J.T.A., Arheimer B., Yin C. & Hefting M.M. (2006) Regional and global concerns over wetlands and water quality. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 21, 96–103.

Key Messages:
We found no studies that evaluated the effects, on vegetation in marshes or swamps, of modifying aquacultural practices in the watershed to reduce pollution.
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
