1078: Brown and black bullheads: Draining invaded waterbodies
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Draining invaded waterbodies is an effective tool for reducing the population size of other fish species such as topmouth gudgeon Pseudorasbora parva, potentially used in combination with gill netting and electrofishing (Copp et al. 2007), or other habitat modifications such as pH alteration (Britton et al. 2008).  It is therefore possible that it could also prove a useful tool for reducing populations of invasive bullheads.
Potential negative side effects of draining waterbodies on native species need to be carefully managed.  However, it is possible that eradicating invasive bullheads from a waterbody would facilitate an increase in the diversity and richness of native species, as found when invasive largemouth bass Micropterus salmoides were eradicated through pond drying in a field study in Japan (Tsunoda et al. 2010).
Britton R., Brazier M., Davies G.D. & Chare S.I. (2008) Case studies on eradicating the Asiatic cyprinid Pseudorasbora parva from fishing lakes in England to prevent their riverine dispersal.  Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems, 18, 867-876.
Copp G.H., Wesley K.J., Verreycken H. & Russell I.C. (2007) When an ‘invasive’ fish species fails to invade! Example of the topmouth gudgeon Pseudorasbora parva. Aquatic Invasions, 2, 107-112.
Tsunoda H., Mitsuo O., Ohira M., Doi M. & Senga Y (2010). Change of fish fauna in ponds after eradication of invasive piscivorous largemouth bass, Micropterus salmoides, in north-eastern Japan. Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems, 20, 710-716.

Key Messages:

No evidence was found for use of draining invaded waterbodies to reduce the population size of invasive bullheads.

'No evidence' for an action means we have not yet found any studies that directly and quantitatively tested this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.
 
 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species
Description: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species Synopsis
