3121: Use herbicide to control problematic plants: brackish/salt marshes
Effectiveness rating: Trade off between benefit and harms
Key Messages:

Seven studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of using herbicide to control problematic plants in brackish/salt marshes. Six studies were in the USA. One study was in South Africa. Two studies shared part of the same experimental set-up.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Relative abundance (1 study): One site comparison study of brackish marshes in the USA found that a marsh sprayed with herbicide for nine years (and burned for three) and a nearby natural marsh supported a similar relative abundance of the dominant plant species, smooth cordgrass Spartina alterniflora.
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One site comparison study of brackish marshes in the USA reported that a marsh sprayed with herbicide for nine years (and burned for three) contained more plant species than an unburned and unsprayed marsh – but also more plant species than a nearby natural marsh.
Native/non-target richness/diversity (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in a pepperweed-invaded marsh in the USA found that applying herbicide did not increase the richness of non-pepperweed species over two years after intervention. The precise effect depended on the herbicide used. One study of an intertidal area in the USA simply counted the number of native salt marsh plant species that colonized after treating smooth cordgrass Spartina alterniflora stands with herbicide.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Native/non-target abundance (5 studies): Three replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after studies in pepperweed-invaded marshes in the USA found that applying herbicide typically did not increase cover of non-pepperweed vegetation, in the two years following intervention. The precise effect depended on the herbicide used. Two studies on the coasts of South Africa and the USA simply quantified the abundance of native salt marsh vegetation that colonized after treating smooth cordgrass Spartina alterniflora stands with herbicide.
Individual species abundance (4 studies): Four studies quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species, other than the species being controlled. For example, one site comparison study of brackish marshes in the USA reported that a marsh sprayed with herbicide for nine years (and burned for three) contained more smooth cordgrass Spartina alterniflora than an unburned and unsprayed marsh, and a similar amount of smooth cordgrass to a nearby natural marsh. One replicated, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in a pepperweed-invaded marsh in the USA reported that applying herbicide typically reduced cover of dominant native species over two years. The precise effect depended on the herbicide used.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (1 study): One site comparison study of brackish marshes in the USA found that in a marsh sprayed with herbicide for nine years (and burned for three), the dominant plant species (smooth cordgrass Spartina alterniflora) grew to a similar height as in a nearby natural marsh.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
