3738: Release reptiles outside of their native range
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Key Messages:

Seven studies evaluated the effects of releasing reptiles outside of their native range on their populations. Three studies were in the US Virgin Islands and one was in each of the USA, Mauritius, the Galápagos and New Zealand.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (7 STUDIES)

Abundance (1 study): One replicated study in the US Virgin Islands found that following a translocation of St. Croix ground lizards to a new island, the population grew over a 10-year period.
Occupancy/range (2 studies): One replicated, randomized study in the US Virgin Islands found that following a release outside of their native range, St. Croix ground lizards were still present five years later. One randomized study in the US Virgin Islands found that following a release outside of their native range, the area occupied by a population of St. Croix ground lizards increased from the 5th to 7th year following release.
Reproductive success (3 studies): Three studies (including two replicated studies) in Maritius, the US Virgin Islands and New Zealand found that following releases outside of their native ranges, there was evidence of reproduction in released populations of Aldabra giant tortoises and Madagascar radiated tortoises, St. Croix ground lizards and Otago skinks after 11 months and 5–7 years.
Survival (3 studies): Two studies (including one replicated, before-and-after study) in the Galápagos and New Zealand found that following releases outside of their native ranges, 77% of sterilized Galápagos giant tortoises and 63% of Otago skinks survived for 11 months or one year. One study in the USA found that annual survival of a second group of gopher tortoises translocated to an island was lower for newly released tortoises compared to established individuals from a previous release when the island had been outside of the native range.
Condition (1 study): One replicated, before-and-after study in the Galápagos found that sterilized Galápagos giant tortoises translocated outside of their native range as part of an ecological replacement gained weight during the first year following their release as.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
