3257: Directly plant non-woody plants: brackish/saline wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Beneficial
Key Messages:

Thirty studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of directly planting emergent, non-woody plants in brackish/saline wetlands. Twenty-four studies were in the USA. There was one study in each of Canada, New Zealand, Spain, Italy and Australia. One study was a global systematic review. Four of the studies monitored different outcomes of one planting experiment in California. Two other studies used the same marsh as each other. Two studies shared some plots with each other.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study around fresh/brackish lakes in Australia reported that as planted rush stands aged, their near-shore plant community became more similar to that behind mature natural rush stands.
Overall richness/diversity (3 studies): One controlled study on a brackish sandflat in the USA reported that an area planted with wetland herbs contained more plant species, after eight years, than an adjacent unplanted area. One replicated, site comparison study around fresh/brackish lakes in Australia found that the near-shore vegetation behind &gt;8-year-old planted rush stands and mature natural stands contained a similar number of plant species. One study of a fresh/brackish/saline marsh in Italy simply quantified plant species richness for up to 13 years after planting herbs (along with other interventions).

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (4 studies): Two site comparison studies (one replicated) of brackish/saline marshes in the USA reported that areas planted with herbs (sometimes along with other interventions) contained less vegetation, after 2–3 growing seasons, than nearby natural marshes. This was true for biomass and cover. One replicated, site comparison study around fresh/brackish lakes in Australia found that the density of near-shore vegetation behind older planted rush stands was similar to that behind mature natural stands. One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in an estuary in the USA reported that plots planted with salt marsh vegetation contained more vegetation biomass than unplanted plots, after three growing seasons.
Individual species abundance (18 studies): Eighteen studies quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. Four studies in the USA compared the abundance of plant species in planted and unplanted areas. Two replicated studies found that planted herb species were typically more abundant in planted than unplanted plots, after 2–4 growing seasons. One replicated, paired, controlled study reported that there were fewer common reed Phragmites australis stems in plots planted with other wetland herbs (and shrubs) than in unplanted plots, after 1–3 years. One replicated, randomized, controlled study reported species-specific effects of planted individuals on recruitment of conspecific seedlings. Nine studies in the USA and Australia compared the abundance of herb species where they had been planted to their abundance in natural brackish/saline marshes. Results varied between studies, species, metrics and time since planting. One before-and-after study of an intertidal site in the USA reported greater abundance of smooth cordgrass Spartina alterniflora over five years after planting (along with other interventions) than before. Seven studies (six replicated) in brackish/saline marshes in the USA and Canada simply quantified the abundance of individual species over 1–3 growing seasons after they were planted (sometimes along with other interventions).

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Overall structure (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, site comparison study in a salt marsh in the USA found that plots planted with herbs contained more canopy layers than unplanted plots after 2–4 growing seasons. One replicated, site comparison study around fresh/brackish lakes in Australia reported that as planted rush stands aged, their width increased – becoming more similar to mature natural stands.
Height (11 studies): Three replicated studies in salt marshes in the USA found that vegetation in areas planted with herbs was at least as tall as vegetation in unplanted areas, 2–4 growing seasons after planting. Of six site comparison studies that compared vegetation height in planted and natural marshes (sometimes along with other interventions), three studies in the USA reported that vegetation was shorter in planted marshes after 2–5 growing seasons. Two studies in the USA and Australia found that vegetation was typically a similar height in planted and natural marshes after 2–11 years. One study in the USA found that vegetation was taller in planted marshes after three growing seasons. Four replicated studies in brackish/saline marshes in the USA simply quantified the height of herbs over 1–5 growing seasons after they were planted; in three of these studies, the average height increased over time.

OTHER

Survival (17 studies): Seventeen studies (including 13 replicated and one systematic review) in the USA, Canada, New Zealand, Spain and multiple countries quantified survival rates of individual herbs planted (or sown) in brackish/saline wetlands. Survival rates ranged from 0% to 100% after 20 days to 2 years. Four studies in the USA, New Zealand and multiple countries reported 0% survival or absence of planted herb species, in at least some cases, after nine months to eight years. Proposed factors affecting survival included elevation/water levels, age of planted individuals, treatment with root dip, planting date, soil pH, damage by waterbirds, salinity and sediment organic matter content.
Growth (2 studies): Two studies monitored true growth of individual herbs (rather than changes in average height of survivors). One replicated study in a brackish marsh in the USA reported that in 8 of 10 cases, rushes/bulrushes grew in both height and circumference over the second year after planting. One replicated study in an estuary in Spain reported growth of planted small cordgrass Spartina maritima and glasswort Sarcocornia perennis over the year after planting.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
