3413: Disturb soil before seeding/planting
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Key Messages:

Seven studies examined the effects of disturbing soil before seeding/planting on grassland vegetation. Five studies were in Europe and one study was in each of the USA and China.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY (3 STUDIES)

Overall richness/diversity (2 studies): One of two replicated, controlled studies in the UK and Germany found that disturbing soil before sowing seeds increased plant and seedling species richness. The other study found no change in plant species richness or diversity.
Grass richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the UK found that rotovating soil before sowing seeds increased grass species richness in most cases compared to harrowing before sowing.
Forb richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the UK found that rotovating soil before sowing seeds increased forb species richness in most cases compared to harrowing before sowing.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE (2 STUDIES)

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the UK found that disturbing soil before sowing seeds did not alter total plant biomass.
Forb abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the USA found that disturbing soil before sowing forb seeds increased the cover of forb species.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (5 STUDIES) 

Germination/Emergence (5 studies): Four of five replicated, controlled studies (three of which were randomized and paired) in the USA, Germany, China and Spain found that disturbing soil before sowing seeds increased plant emergence in most cases compared to sowing alone. The other study found no change in seed germination.
Survival (2 studies): One of two replicated, controlled studies (one of which was randomized and paired) in China and Spain found that disturbing soil before sowing seeds increased the survival of seedlings. The other study found that ploughing to disturb soil followed by planting did not alter the survival of planted species.
Growth (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the USA found that disturbing soil before planting forb seedlings had no effect on seedling growth.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Grassland Conservation
Description: Grassland Synopsis
