2952: Abandon cropland: allow freshwater marshes or swamps to recover without active intervention
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of abandoning cropland with the expectation that freshwater marshes or swamps would recover spontaneously. There was one study in each of Spain, South Korea, China and Japan. The studies involved former rice fields, soybean fields or pastures.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community composition (2 studies): Two site comparison studies in South Korea and Japan reported that the overall plant community composition in abandoned cropland became more like natural swamps and/or marshes over time.
Overall richness/diversity (2 studies): One site comparison study on a floodplain in Japan found that pastures abandoned for 5–25 years contained a higher richness of vascular, wetland plant species than pastures that remained in use. One study in South Korea simply reported the number of plant species in abandoned rice paddies increased over time.
Characteristic plant richness/diversity (1 study): One site comparison study on a floodplain in Japan found that pastures abandoned for 5–25 years typically contained more marsh-indicator and swamp-indicator species than pastures that remained in use.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (2 studies): One site comparison study in China found that vegetation biomass in abandoned soybean fields was lower than in natural wet meadows after three years, similar to natural wet meadows after six years, and higher than in natural wet meadows after 12 years. One study in Spain simply quantified the peak biomass and density of vegetation in rice fields abandoned for up to six years. Biomass, but not density, increased with time since abandonment.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (1 study): One site comparison study in China found that soybean fields abandoned for 3–12 years contained vegetation of a similar height to natural wet meadows.
Diameter/perimeter/area (1 study): One site comparison study in South Korea reported that rice fields abandoned for 10 years contained thinner-stemmed Japanese alder Alnus japonica than mature alder forests.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
