3243: Add below-ground organic matter: freshwater marshes
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
This action involves adding organic matter (i.e. remains or waste products of living organisms) below the ground surface, for example by mixing it into the sediment or placing it into holes. Specific substances than can be used include compost, sewage sludge, wood chips and seaweed extract.
The soil organic matter content of wetland soils may be reduced by disturbance. For example, drainage allows oxygen into the soil, whilst reprofiling removes surface layers rich in organic matter (Bruland et al. 2006). Organic matter can be an important component of wetland soils. It directly supplies nutrients to growing plants, supplies carbon and energy to soil organisms, helps bind the soil together, retains water during dry periods, and mediates soil temperature (Donahue et al. 1983; Weil & Brady 2016). Adding carbon-rich organic materials can indirectly modify nutrient availability by stimulating microbial activity, and so could help to manage invasive species where they benefit from an excess of certain nutrients (Reever Morghan & Seastedt 1999; Tilman et al. 1999; Perry et al. 2004).
To be summarized as evidence for this action, studies must evaluate the effects of adding organic matter without adding living vegetation. The organic matter should be used to help or manage existing vegetation, such as remnant patches of vegetation, or seedlings that germinate from seeds already present.
Related actions: Add surface mulch; Add below-ground organic matter to complement planting.
Bruland G.L., Richardson C.J. & Whalen S.C. (2006) Spatial variability of denitrification potential and related soil properties in created, restored, and paired natural wetlands. Wetlands, 26, 1042–1056.
Donahue R.L., Shickluna J.C. & Robertson L.S. (1983) Soils: An Introduction to Soils and Plant Growth, Fifth Edition. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA.
Perry L.G., Galatowitsch S.M. & Rosen C.J. (2004) Competitive control of invasive vegetation: a native wetland sedge suppresses Phalaris arundinacea in carbon-enriched soil. Journal of Applied Ecology, 41, 151–162.
Reever Morghan K.J. & Seastedt T.R. (1999) Effects of soil nitrogen reduction on nonnative plants in restored grasslands. Restoration Ecology, 7, 51–55.
Tilman E.A., Tilman D., Crawley M.J. & Johnston A.E. (1999) Biological weed control via nutrient competition: potassium limitation of dandelions. Ecological Applications, 9, 103–111.
Weil R.R. & Brady N.C. (2016) The Nature and Properties of Soils, Fifteenth Edition. Pearson, USA.

Key Messages:
We found no studies that evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of adding below-ground organic matter to restore or create freshwater marshes.
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
