2201: Create artificial wetlands to reduce the amount of pollutants reaching the sea
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Intensive agriculture constitutes an important source of pollution to the marine environment. Agriculture waste and pollutants can enter rivers and other watercourse runoffs and be discharged into the sea (Rawlings et al. 1998). For instance, wastewaters can introduce agrichemicals, bacteria, excess nutrients and solid particles, which negatively impact on subtidal benthic invertebrates (Rawlings et al. 1998). Artificial wetlands can be created with the aim of retaining agricultural pollution (Smiley & Alfred 2011). For instance, solid particles sink in areas of slow water flow and plants growing on the wetlands can remove excess nutrients (Brix 1994). Creating artificial wetlands near agricultural lands may reduce the amount of pollutants reaching the marine environment and reduce associated risks to subtidal benthic invertebrates.
Evidence for other interventions related to pollution from agriculture are summarised under “Threat: Pollution – Regulate the use, dosage and disposal of agrichemicals”, Treat wastewater from intensive livestock holdings”, and “Establish aquaculture to extract the nutrients from run-offs”
 
Brix H. (1994) Use of constructed wetlands in water pollution control: historical development, present status, and future perspectives. Water Science and Technology, 30, 209–223.
Rawlins B.G., Ferguson A.J., Chilton P.J., Arthurton R.S., Rees J.G. & Baldock J.W. (1998) Review of agricultural pollution in the Caribbean with particular emphasis on small island developing states. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 36, 658–668.
Smiley P.C. & Allred B.J. (2011) Differences in aquatic communities between wetlands created by an agricultural water recycling system. Wetlands Ecology and Management, 19, 495–505.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of creating artificial wetlands to reduce the amount of pollutants reaching the sea on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.
 
 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
