2898: Delay or cease operations if marine and freshwater mammals are detected within a specified zone
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Activities that produce large amounts of underwater noise, such as seismic airgun surveys, pile driving, dredging, explosives and sonar, may disturb or cause auditory injury to marine and freshwater mammals (Gordon et al. 2003, Bailey et al. 2010). Delaying or ceasing such activities for a specified time if marine or freshwater mammals are detected within an ‘exclusion’ zone may help to reduce negative impacts and the risk of injury. This may involve using trained observers, acoustic monitoring and/or automated systems to detect mammals (Verfuss et al. 2018).
Bailey H., Senior B., Simmons D., Rusin J., Picken G. & Thompson P.M. (2010) Assessing underwater noise levels during pile-driving at an offshore windfarm and its potential effects on marine mammals. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 60, 888–897.
Gordon J., Gillespie D., Potter J., Frantzis A., Simmonds M.P., Swift R. & Thompson D. (2003) A review of the effects of seismic surveys on marine mammals. Marine Technology Society Journal, 37, 16–34.
Verfuss U.K., Gillespie D., Gordon J., Marques T.A., Miller B., Plunkett R., Theriault J.A., Tollit D.J., Zitterbart D.P., Hubert P. & Thomas L. (2018) Comparing methods suitable for monitoring marine mammals in low visibility conditions during seismic surveys. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 126, 1–18.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of delaying or ceasing operations if marine and freshwater mammals are detected within a specified zone on marine and freshwater mammal populations.

‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
