3180: Add water to marshes or swamps to compensate for drought
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Water may be added to marshes or swamps to compensate for meteorological drought: periods of water shortage linked to below-average precipitation. Long periods with dry soils, which may be accompanied by increases in salinity, can kill or change the composition of vegetation (e.g. Visser et al. 2002). Water may be added to a site for weeks, months or years, depending on the duration of the drought. Longer periods of water additions are less likely to be sustainable, both financially and in terms of damage to other ecosystems which may be deprived of water. Caution: The added water must be of a suitable chemical composition for the target habitat (e.g. correct pH and salinity and not excessively polluted). Consider that adding water to a focal site could deprive habitats elsewhere.
Related actions: Raise water level to restore degraded habitats (freshwater marshes – brackish/salt marshes – freshwater swamps – brackish/saline swamps);     Raise water level to restore/create habitats from other land uses (freshwater marshes – brackish/salt marshes – freshwater swamps – brackish/saline swamps);     Actively manage water level (freshwater marshes – brackish/salt marshes – freshwater swamps – brackish/saline swamps).
Visser J.M., Sasser C.E., Chabreck R.H. & Linscombe R.G. (2002) The impact of a severe drought on the vegetation of a subtropical estuary. Estuaries, 25, 1184–1195.

Key Messages:
We found no studies that evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of adding water to marshes or swamps to compensate for drought.
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
