1446: Use loud-speakers to broadcast sounds of potential threats (e.g. barking dogs, explosions, gunshots)
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Farmers could use loud-speakers to play sounds that are perceived as threats by the problem primates to deter them from farms. These can be sounds of barking dogs, explosions, gunshots, vocalizations of predators, etc. However, one problem with this intervention is that primates could habituate to the ‘false alarms’ ultimately leading to a reduction in the long-term effectiveness of this method. This has been found to be the case with baboons Papio anubis (Strum 1994). A study that tested the influence of a combination of human and mechanical sounds, predator sounds, and vocalizations of other primates living in the same area, on primate activity budgets, found that play-backs of these sounds caused Cape baboons Papio ursinus to run more and feed less, but that there was no effect on the behaviour of vervet monkeys Chlorocebus pygerythrus (Richardson, 2014).
            Using loud-speakers to broadcast primate alarm calls to crop-raiding primates is discussed under ‘Use loud-speakers to broadcast primate alarm calls’.
 
Richardson M.R. (2014) Efficacy of an electronic scarecrow on 4 mammalian cropraiders in Limpopo province, South Africa. MSc thesis. Western Kentucky University.
Strum S.C. (1994) Prospects for management of primate pests. Revue d'Ecologie (Terre et Vie), 49, 295–306.

Key Messages:

We found no evidence for the effects of using loud-speakers to broadcast sounds of potential threats to crop-raiding primates on primate populations.

'No evidence' for an action means we have not yet found any studies that directly and quantitatively tested this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Primate Conservation
Description: Primate Synopsis
