3015: Reduce frequency of hunting/collecting animals
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Hunting or collecting animals from marshes or swamps (or animals that use these habitats) can damage vegetation. The hunting/collecting activity can directly damage vegetation, e.g. trampling by foot traffic along shorelines used by anglers (USFWS 2006). Removing key animal species can have indirect effects on vegetation. For example, massive die-offs of salt marsh in the southeastern USA were probably related to overharvesting of predatory crabs – which used to eat and control the population of herbivorous snails (Silliman & Bertness 2002). Hunting or collecting animals less often (e.g. every two years instead of every year) may reduce these direct and indirect impacts, or at least give populations longer to recover.
For this action, “reduction” includes stopping harvest altogether. Note that studies comparing areas that remain unharvested to areas that become harvested, at any frequency, are not summarized as evidence for this action.
Related actions: Reduce intensity of hunting/collecting animals;     Control populations of wild vertebrates (freshwater marshes – brackish/salt marshes – freshwater swamps – brackish/saline swamps);     Control populations of wild invertebrates.
Silliman B.R. & Bertness M.D. (2002) A trophic cascade regulates salt marsh primary production. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA, 99, 10500–10505.
USFWS (2006) Texas Chenier Plain Refuge Complex: Draft Environmental Impact Statement, Comprehensive Conservation Plan, and Land Protection Plan. United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA.

Key Messages:
We found no studies that evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of reducing the frequency of hunting/collecting animals in marshes or swamps.
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
