3151: Introduce plants to marshes or swamps to control pollution
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
This action involves introducing vegetation into polluted marshes or swamps, with the intention that the introduced plants help to control pollution (Bert et al. 2009). Plants can help to clean up existing pollutants, or manage chronic inputs of pollutants. Plants may directly absorb or break down pollutants, or facilitate break down by microbes through providing oxygen and a large surface area (Brix 2003). To be summarized as evidence for this action, studies must report effects on desirable marsh or swamp vegetation other than that planted to control pollution.
Related actions: Retain/restore/create vegetation around focal site, including in waterways (freshwater marshes – brackish/salt marshes – freshwater swamps – brackish/saline swamps);     Stimulate microbial breakdown of oil.
Bert V., Seuntjens P., Dejonghe W., Lacherez S., Thuy H.T.T. & Vandecasteele B. (2009) Phytoremediation as a management option for contaminated sediments in tidal marshes, flood control areas and dredged sediment landfill sites. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 16, 745–764.
Brix, H. (2003) Plants used in constructed wetlands and their functions. Proceedings of the 1st International Seminar on the Use of Aquatic Macrophytes for Wastewater Treatment in Constructed Wetlands, 8–10 May 2003, Lisbon, Portugal, 81–109.

Key Messages:
We found no studies that evaluated the effects, on other vegetation, of introducing plants to marshes or swamps with the primary aim of controlling pollution.
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
