2232: Designate a Marine Protected Area and limit the density of traps
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Fishing can impact subtidal benthic invertebrates through species removal or habitat damage from fishing gear entering in contact with the seabed (Collie et al. 2000). Traps or pots are often used to fish for crabs or lobsters and consist of structures into which species of commercial interest enter through funnels which encourage entry, but limit escape. Specific areas can be designated as protected, in which the density of traps is limited (Acheson 1998; Miller 1976). Inside protected areas where the density of traps is limited, the threat from these practices to subtidal benthic invertebrates is removed, and previously impacted populations are, in theory, able to recover over time. However, species and populations are still subjected to the effects of other fishing activities allowed (for instance mobile fishing gears).
Evidence related to similar intervention outside of a protected area are summarised under “Threat: Biological resource use – Limit the density of traps”.
 
Acheson J. (1998) Lobster trap limits: A solution to a communal action problem. Human Organization, 57, 43–52.
Collie J.S., Hall S.J., Kaiser M.J. & Poiner I.R. (2000) A quantitative analysis of fishing impacts on shelf‐sea benthos. Journal of Animal Ecology, 69, 785–798.
Miller R.J. (1976) North American crab fisheries: regulations and their rationales. Fishery Bulletin, 74, 623–633.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of designating a Marine Protected Area and limiting the density of traps on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
