2055: Set limits for change in sediment particle size during rock dumping
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Rock dump involves placing rock material on the seabed or surrounding infrastructure to stabilise underwater structures from offshore industries, such as oil and gas platforms or windfarms, to protect pipelines, and remove the risk of snagging by fishing vessels operating trawl nets (Visser & van der Meer 2008). Rock dump can impact subtidal benthic invertebrates through loss of natural sediment and changes in habitat characteristics, such as particle size. Setting limits for changes in particle size during rock dump may reduce the level of threat and retain suitable sediment and habitat properties, thereby potentially reducing risk to subtidal benthic invertebrates. Evidence related to other means of stabilizing or burying offshore infrastructures and pipelines are summarised under “Threat: Energy production and mining – Bury pipelines instead of surface laying and rock dumping” and “Threat: Transportation and service corridors – Bury cables and pipelines in the seabed rather than laying them on the seabed”. Other evidence for interventions related to rock dumping are summarised in “Habitat restoration and creation – Modify rock dump to make it more similar to natural substrate”.
 
Visser, R. & van der Meer, J. (2008) Immediate displacement of the seabed during Subsea Rock Installation (SRI). Terra et Aqua, 110.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of setting limits for change in sediment particle size during rock dump on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
