3940: Thin trees within forests
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Thinning is a forestry practice that involves the selective removal of trees to reduce tree density and improve the growth rate and health of the remaining trees. Thinning has been done historically to maximize timber production but may have ecological benefits. Thinning removes some of the canopy, allowing light in to the woodland floor, replicating the natural creation of woodland clearings. This may benefit butterflies and moths by encouraging the growth of food plants on the woodland floor, or by creating sheltered, sunny sites for basking and territory defence. However, some species spend almost their entire lives in the canopy, and may be adversely affected by the loss of even a few canopy trees, so caution should be taken when applying this action.
For studies that used thinning as part of selective logging methods, see the intervention “Biological resource use – Harvest groups of trees or use thinning instead of clearcutting”.

Key Messages:

Six studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of thinning trees within forests and woodland. Three studies were in the USA and one was in each of Côte d’Ivoire, Finland and the Czech Republic.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (5 STUDIES)

Community composition (1 study): One site comparison study in Côte d’Ivoire found that rarer species of fruit-feeding butterfly were less frequently caught in a forest managed by thinning than in an unmanaged, naturally regenerating forest.


Richness/diversity (6 studies): Four studies (including two replicated, paired, controlled, before-and-after studies) in the USA and Finland found that one, two or four years after management, coniferous woodland which had been thinned, along with either prescribed burning, mulching or nearby felling, had a greater species richness of butterflies, or butterflies, diurnal moths and bumblebees combined, than either unmanaged woodland or before management. One site comparison study in Côte d’Ivoire found that a forest managed by thinning had a similar species richness and diversity of fruit-feeding butterflies to an unmanaged, naturally regenerating forest. One replicated, paired sites, controlled study in the Czech Republic found that partially-cleared forest plots had higher butterfly but lower moth species richness than plots of closed-canopy forest.

POPULATION RESPONSE (5 STUDIES)

Abundance (5 studies): Four studies (including two replicated, paired, controlled, before-and-after studies) in the USA and Finland found that one, two or four years after management, coniferous woodland which had been thinned, along with either prescribed burning, mulching or nearby felling, had a higher abundance of all butterflies, or specialist butterflies, than either unmanaged woodland or before management. One site comparison study in Côte d’Ivoire found that a forest managed by thinning had a similar abundance of fruit-feeding butterflies to an unmanaged, naturally regenerating forest.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
