3862: Restore or create new habitats after mining and quarrying  
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Former mining and quarrying sites are often hostile environments for butterflies and moths, as large areas of bare ground may remain sparsely vegetated for many decades (Rowe et al. 2006). However, many former extraction sites have been turned into important nature reserves over time since their abandonment (e.g. Turner et al. 2009). Restoration of such sites may involve a number of different actions, such as introducing soil or nutrients, planting desired vegetation communities, flooding areas or landscaping new features. A common approach for the restoration of post-mining sites is “technical reclamation”, whereby the uneven surface is flattened by heavy machinery, before fertile soil is added and sown with grasses and herbs, and planted with trees. However, by accelerating succession, such an approach can reduce habitat availability for species which depend on disturbed, early successional habitats (Moradi et al. 2018).
Moradi J., Potocký P., Kočárek P., Bartuška M., Tajovský K., Tichánek F., Frouz J. & Tropek R. (2018) Influence of surface flattening on biodiversity of terrestrial arthropods during early stages of brown coal spoil heap restoration. Journal of Environmental Management, 220, 1–7.
Rowe E.C., Healey J.R., Edwards-Jones G., Hills J., Howells M. & Jones D.L. (2006) Fertilizer application during primary succession changes the structure of plant and herbivore communities. Biological Conservation, 131, 510–522.
Turner E.C., Granroth H.M.V., Johnson H.R., Lucas C.B.H., Thompson A.M., Froy H., German R.N. & Holgate R. (2009) Habitat preference and dispersal of the Duke of Burgundy butterfly (Hamearis lucina) on an abandoned chalk quarry in Bedfordshire, UK. Journal of Insect Conservation, 13, 475–486.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of restoring or creating new habitats after mining and quarrying. Two studies were in the Czech Republic, and one was in each of the UK and New Zealand.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, paired, site comparison study in the Czech Republic found that 15% of 380 invertebrate species (including 208 moth species) were only found on flattened spoil heaps, compared to 30% which were only found on unflattened heaps.
Richness/diversity (2 studies): One replicated, paired, site comparison study in the Czech Republic found that technically restored quarries had a lower species richness of butterflies and day-flying moths than quarries left to restore naturally. One replicated, paired, site comparison study in the Czech Republic found that flattened spoil heaps had a lower species richness of moths than unflattened spoil heaps.

POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Abundance (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in the UK found that on slate waste tips trees where fertilizer was applied had a similar abundance of caterpillars to trees that were unfertilized. One site comparison study in New Zealand found that a peat bog restored after mining supported a similar density of Fred the thread moth caterpillars to undisturbed bogs.
Condition (1 study): One site comparison study in New Zealand found that a peat bog restored after mining supported Fred the thread moth caterpillars of a similar size to caterpillars on undisturbed bogs.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
