3913: Manage host species’ populations for the benefit of dependent parasite/mutualist species 
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Some butterflies, in particular the large blues Phengaris (Maculinea) spp., are parasites of ant colonies of the genus Myrmica, and depend upon just one or two host ant species for their caterpillars to develop. Other species of blue butterfly, such as the chalkhill blue Polyommatus coridon, have mutualistic relationships with ants, whereby the caterpillar excretes a sugary secretion which is eaten by the ants, which in turn protect the caterpillar (Thomas & Lewington 2016). Therefore, effective conservation for these butterflies depends not just on habitat management for the requirements of the butterfly, but also for the requirements of the Myrmica ants and (in some cases) the suppression of the more competitive black ant Lasius niger (Wynhoff et al. 2011, Wynhoff et al. 2017). For example, the translocation of sods from fen meadows to restoration areas encouraged colonization by Myrmica scabrinodis (Wynhoff et al. 2017). Myrmica scabrinodis is further supported by early or late season mowing, while Myrmica rubra nests should be undisturbed in summer, and mown in late autumn (Wynhoff et al. 2011).
Studies are only included here if they record the outcome on a species of butterfly or moth, not just on the host or mutualist species.
Thomas J.A. & Lewington R. (2016) The Butterflies of Britain & Ireland. Third edition, Bloomsbury Publishing, UK.
Wynhoff I., van Gestel R., van Swaay C. & van Langevelde F. (2011) Not only the butterflies: managing ants on road verges to benefit Phengaris (Maculinea) butterflies. Journal of Insect Conservation, 15, 189–206.
Wynhoff I., Kolvoort A.M., Bassignana C.F., Berg M.P. & van Langevelde F. (2017) Fen meadows on the move for the conservation of Maculinea (Phengaris) teleius butterflies. Journal of Insect Conservation, 21, 379–392.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of managing host species’ populations for the benefit of dependent parasite or mutualist species of butterfly or moth.

‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
