3965: Use rotational grazing
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Many butterfly species rely on transitional grassland habitats, where continuous management (often by grazing) results in a grass sward which is too short, or prevents the growth of their host plant, but complete abandonment leads to the sward becoming too long or the host plant being outcompeted (e.g. Eichel & Fartmann 2008). Rotational grazing, where livestock are moved between different areas of a site throughout the year, is one option for creating this kind of intermediate habitat, as well as generating a mosaic of more or less recently grazed areas on a larger scale. For other rotational management options, see “Use rotational mowing”, “Reduce grazing intensity on grassland by seasonal removal of livestock” and “Natural system modifications – Use rotational burning”.
Eichel S. & Fartmann T. (2008) Management of calcareous grasslands for Nickerl's fritillary (Melitaea aurelia) has to consider habitat requirements of the immature stages, isolation, and patch area. Journal of Insect Conservation, 12, 677–688.

Key Messages:

Six studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of using rotational grazing. Three studies were in France, two were in the USA and one was in the UK.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (5 STUDIES)

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that rotational, cattle-grazed grasslands had a similar butterfly community to continuously grazed or patch-burned grasslands.
Richness/diversity (5 studies): Two of four replicated studies (including one randomized, controlled study, two controlled studies and one site comparison study) in France and the USA found that rotational cattle- and sheep-grazed grasslands had a greater species richness of butterflies and burnet moths than continuously grazed or patch-burned grassland. Another of these studies found that rotationally sheep-grazed grassland had a similar species richness of butterflies and burnet moths to continuously grazed grassland. The other study found that rotational cattle-grazed pastures had a greater species richness of butterflies than constantly grazed pastures but only at a high, not low, stocking density. One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that rotationally managed grasslands, including some rotationally grazed grasslands, which were last managed longer ago had a higher species richness of butterflies than more recently managed grasslands.

POPULATION RESPONSE (6 STUDIES)

Abundance (6 studies): Two of four replicated, controlled studies (including two randomized studies and one paired study) in France and the UK found that rotational cattle- and sheep-grazed grassland had a higher abundance of butterflies and burnet moths and caterpillars (along with other invertebrates) than continuously grazed grasslands. However, one of these studies only found this in the first of three years of management. Another of these studies found that rotationally sheep-grazed grassland had a similar abundance of butterflies and burnet moths to continuously grazed grassland. The other study found that rotational cattle-grazed pastures had a higher abundance of butterflies than constantly grazed pastures but only at a high, not low stocking density. One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that the abundance of two species was higher, two species were lower and the other five species did not differ in rotationally cattle-grazed grasslands compared to continuously grazed or patch-burned grasslands. One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that rotationally managed grasslands, including some rotationally grazed grasslands, which were last managed longer ago had a higher abundance of butterflies than more recently managed grasslands.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
