3961: Reduce cutting frequency on grassland
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Productive grasslands used for silage are intensively managed, with frequent cutting resulting in a short and uniform sward (Bubová et al. 2015). While mowing is important for maintaining open grassland, reducing cutting frequency allows some vegetation to grow taller, increasing structural complexity and floral diversity (Morris 2000), and this may provide more suitable habitat for some grassland butterflies and moths (e.g. Elligsen et al. 1997).
For studies on reducing cutting frequency alongside other reductions in management intensity, such as reduced chemical input, see “Reduce management intensity on permanent grasslands (several interventions at once)”. For studies on removing grassland management entirely, see “Cease mowing on grassland to allow early succession”. For studies on increasing grassland management, see “Increase grazing intensity or cutting frequency on grassland”.
Elligsen H., Beinlich B. & Plachter H. (1997) Effects of large-scale cattle grazing on populations of Coenonympha glycerion and Lasiommata megera (Lepidoptera: Satyridae). Journal of Insect Conservation, 1, 13–23.
Morris M.G. (2000) The effects of structure and its dynamics on the ecology and conservation of arthropods in British grasslands. Biological Conservation, 95, 129–142.
Bubová T., Vrabec V., Kulma M. & Nowicki P. (2015) Land management impacts on European butterflies of conservation concern: a review. Journal of Insect Conservation, 19, 805–821.

Key Messages:

Six studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of reducing cutting frequency on grassland. One study was in each of Slovakia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, the UK, Germany and Italy.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Richness/diversity (3 studies): Two of three replicated studies (including one randomized, paired, controlled study and two site comparison studies) in the UK, Germany and Italy found that meadows cut once/year had a higher species richness of butterflies (along with other pollinators) and moths than meadows cut two or more times/year. The other study found that meadows cut one, two or three times/year all had a similar species richness of butterflies.

POPULATION RESPONSE (5 STUDIES)

Abundance (5 studies): Three of five replicated studies (including two randomized, paired, controlled studies and three site comparison studies) in Slovakia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, the UK and Italy and found that meadows cut once/year had a similar abundance of all butterflies, and of meadow brown adults and caterpillars and scarce large blue adults, to meadows cut two or three times/year. The other two studies found that meadows cut occasionally or once/year had a higher abundance of Scotch argus and pollinators (including butterflies) than intensively mown grasslands and meadows cut twice/year.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
