3890: Remove or control non-native or problematic plants 
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Invasive or dominant native plant species can alter habitat structure, outcompeting the host plants of butterflies and moths, or making the habitat otherwise unsuitable (Sinclair 2002). Removal of problematic plants may be conducted by hand, with machinery, or by targeted herbicide application (e.g. Glaeser & Schultz 2014). This action includes studies which have tested any of these methods, alone or in combination.
Note that herbicide application may also have negative effects on butterflies and moths (Russell & Schultz 2010) and the choice of which herbicide to use may be important for minimising harms (Schultz et al. 2016). For studies testing the effect of reducing herbicide application, see “Restrict certain pesticides or other agricultural chemicals” and “Reduce fertilizer, pesticide or herbicide use generally”.
Glaeser R.M. & Schultz C.B. (2014) Characterizing a contentious management tool: the effects of a grass-specific herbicide on the silvery blue butterfly. Journal of Insect Conservation, 18, 1047–1058.
Russell C. & Schultz C.B. (2010) Effects of grass-specific herbicides on butterflies: an experimental investigation to advance conservation efforts. Journal of Insect Conservation, 14, 53–63.
Schultz C.B., Zemaitis J.L., Thomas C.C., Bowers M.D. & Crone E.E. (2016) Non-target effects of grass-specific herbicides differ among species, chemicals and host plants in Euphydryas butterflies. Journal of Insect Conservation, 20, 867–877.
Sinclair L.J. (2002) Distribution and conservation requirements of Notoreas sp., an unnamed Geometrid moth on the Taranaki coast, North Island, New Zealand. New Zealand Journal of Zoology, 29, 311–322.

Key Messages:

Nine studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of removing or controlling non-native or problematic plants. Five studies were in the USA and one was in each of Poland, South Africa, Australia and Mauritius.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Richness/diversity (2 studies): Two studies (including one replicated, paired, site comparison study and one controlled study) in Mauritius and the USA found that sites where invasive plants were removed by weeding or cutting and applying herbicide (in one case along with fencing to exclude non-native pigs and deer) had a greater species richness of butterflies than untreated sites. One of these studies also found that sites where Chinese privet was removed had a similar species richness of butterflies to sites which had not been invaded.

POPULATION RESPONSE (8 STUDIES)

Abundance (7 studies): Four of six studies (including three controlled studies, one before-and-after study and two site comparison studies) in Poland, South Africa, the USA and Mauritius found that sites where trees and shrubs were removed or invasive plants were cut to a similar height to native plants, or removed by weeding or cutting and applying herbicide (in one case along with fencing to exclude non-native pigs and deer), had a greater abundance of Apollo butterflies, a higher density of Fender’s blue eggs, or higher total abundance of butterflies, compared to before removal or untreated sites. One of these studies also found that sites where Chinese privet was removed had a similar abundance of butterflies to sites which had not been invaded. The fifth study found that in plots where herbicide was applied to control invasive grasses, the abundance of Columbia silvery blue eggs and caterpillars was similar to unsprayed plots. The sixth study found that, after prescribed burning, an area where bracken fern was also removed had fewer Brenton blue butterfly eggs than an area without removal. One study in Australia reported that a population of purple copper butterfly caterpillars translocated to an area where invasive plants had been removed, along with host plant translocation and other habitat management, increased in number compared to at the time of translocation.


Survival (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the USA found that in plots where herbicide was applied to control invasive grasses, the survival of Columbia silvery blue eggs and caterpillars was similar to unsprayed plots. One replicated, randomized, controlled study in the USA found that one herbicide commonly used to control invasive grasses reduced the survival of snowberry checkerspot caterpillars, but two other herbicides did not affect the survival of snowberry checkerspot, Edith’s checkerspot or Baltimore checkerspot caterpillars.

BEHAVIOUR (4 STUDIES)

Use (3 studies): Two of three randomized, controlled studies (including two replicated, paired studies and one before-and-after study) in the USA found that sites where invasive oat-grass was cut to a similar height to native plants, or where Eastern white pine was removed, were used more by Fender’s blue and frosted elfin butterflies than untreated sites. The third study found that habitat use by Columbia silvery blue butterflies was similar in plots where herbicide was applied to control invasive grasses and in unsprayed plots.
Behaviour change (1 study): One before-and-after study in Poland found that removal of trees and shrubs, in addition to the release of captive bred adults and pupae, allowed adults from two previously separated populations of Apollo butterflies to mix.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
