3934: Restore or create habitat connectivity 
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
An important threat to butterflies and moths is the increasing fragmentation of habitat patches by human activity (Cavanzón-Medrano et al. 2018). This limits dispersal, especially in species which are poor fliers, and leaves isolated populations vulnerable to local extinction (van Langevelde & Wynhoff 2009). Species richness tends to be higher in better connected habitat patches (Öckinger et al. 2010), so restoring habitat connectivity across a landscape may be important for reconnecting isolated populations (Schultz et al. 2008). For example, woodland creation projects can be used to increase connectivity between existing woodland fragments, but are most beneficial when they are spatially-targeted (Fuentes-Montemayor et al. 2015).
For studies on retaining habitat corridors, see “Habitat protection – Retain connectivity between habitat patches”.
Cavanzón-Medrano L.E., Machkour-M’Rabet S., Chablé-Iuit L.R., Pozo C., Hénaut Y. & Legal L. (2018) Effect of Climatic Conditions and Land Cover on Genetic Structure and Diversity of Eunica tatila (Lepidoptera) in the Yucatan Peninsula, Mexico. Diversity, 10, 79.
Fuentes-Montemayor E., Peredo-Alvarez V.M., Watts K. & Park K.J. (2015) Are woodland creation schemes providing suitable resources for biodiversity? Woodland moths as a case study. Biodiversity and Conservation, 24, 3049–3070.
Öckinger E., Schweiger O., Crist T.O., Debinski D.M., Krauss J., Kuussaari M., Petersen J.D., Pöyry J., Settele J., Summerville K.S. & Bommarco R. (2010) Life-history traits predict species responses to habitat area and isolation: a cross-continental synthesis. Ecology Letters, 13, 969–979.
Schultz C.B., Russell C. & Wynn L. (2008) Restoration, reintroduction, and captive propagation for at-risk butterflies: A review of British and American conservation efforts. Israel Journal of Ecology & Evolution, 54, 41–61.
van Langevelde F. & Wynhoff I. (2009) What limits the spread of two congeneric butterfly species after their reintroduction: quality or spatial arrangement of habitat? Animal Conservation, 12, 540–548.

Key Messages:

Six studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of restoring or creating habitat connectivity. Three studies were in the USA, two were in the UK and one was in Sweden.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (4 STUDIES)

Abundance (4 studies): Four studies (including one controlled, before-and-after study and one before-and-after study) in the USA and the UK found that restoring connectivity between lupine, bracken, pastures or prairie patches increased the abundance of Karner blue, high brown fritillary, small pearl-bordered fritillary, marsh fritillary and regal fritillary.

BEHAVIOUR (2 STUDIES)

Use (2 studies): One site comparison study in Sweden reported that grassland strips providing nectar or shelter were each more likely to be used by one of four butterfly species than strips with no resources. One replicated, controlled study in the USA found that common buckeye and variegated fritillary butterflies were more likely to move between connected than unconnected habitat patches.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
