2462: Release translocated/captive-bred mammals in larger unrelated groups
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Key Messages:

Five studies evaluated the effects of releasing translocated or captive-bred mammals in larger unrelated groups. Two studies were in South Africa, one was in Namibia and South Africa, one was in the USA and one was in Australia.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (5 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (3 studies): A replicated, paired sites study in the USA found that black-tailed prairie dogs translocated in larger groups had higher reproductive success than smaller groups. A study in South Africa found that Cape buffalo translocated to a fenced reserve as a larger group formed a single herd and reproduced, whilst a smaller group separated. A study in South Africa found that rehabilitated and captive-bred cheetahs released in groups (unrelated and family) and as individuals reproduced.
Survival (4 studies): A replicated, paired sites study in the USA found that black-tailed prairie dogs translocated in larger groups had higher initial daily survival rate than smaller groups. Two studies (one controlled) in Namibia and South Africa and Australia found that releasing translocated black rhinoceroses and burrowing bettongs in larger groups did not increase survival. A study in South Africa found that most adult rehabilitated and captive-bred cheetahs released in groups (unrelated and family) and as individuals survived at least one year.

BEHAVIOUR (2 STUDIES)

Behaviour change (2 studies): A replicated, paired sites study in the USA found that black-tailed prairie dogs translocated in larger groups attracted more immigrants than smaller groups. A study in South Africa found that Cape buffalo translocated as a larger group formed a single herd and stayed in the fenced reserve, whilst a smaller group scattered and escaped the reserve.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
