2966: Exclude or remove livestock from historically grazed freshwater marshes
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Key Messages:

Ten studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of excluding or removing livestock from historically grazed freshwater marshes. Seven studies were in the USA, two were in Morocco and one was in Australia. In all 10 studies the focal livestock included cattle (mixed with sheep in the two studies in Morocco). Two studies in the USA were based on the same experimental set-up, and the two studies in Morocco shared some study sites.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community composition (4 studies): Two site comparison studies in Morocco and the USA reported that marshes/pools fenced to exclude livestock for 3–30 years contained a different overall plant community to grazed sites. In the USA, the precise effect depended on the time since exclusion. Two replicated, randomized, paired, controlled studies in marshes in Australia and the USA found that fencing to exclude cattle typically had no significant effect on the overall plant community composition after 1–14 years. One of the studies also found that the plant community in fenced and grazed marshes was of similar quality, relative to pristine local marshes.
Relative abundance (3 studies): Of three replicated, randomized, paired, controlled studies that reported data on the relative abundance of plant groups, two studies (based on one experimental set-up) in the USA found that ephemeral pools fenced to exclude cattle for 1–10 years had similar or greater cover of grasses relative to forbs than pools that remained grazed. The other study, also in the USA, found that the relative abundance of forbs, grass-like plants and shrubs was similar in marshes fenced to exclude cattle for 1–3 years and marshes that remained grazed.
Overall richness/diversity (6 studies): Four replicated studies (two also randomized, paired, controlled) in the USA, Morocco and Australia found that marshes/pools fenced to exclude cattle, for 1–30 years, typically had similar overall plant species richness to sites that remained grazed. One of the studies found that the same was true for overall plant diversity. One replicated, site comparison study of ephemeral pools in Morocco found that pools fenced to exclude livestock for &gt;30 years had similar (in a dry year) or greater (in a wet year) plant species richness compared to pools that remained grazed. One site comparison study in the USA found that marshes fenced to exclude cattle for 3–13 years contained fewer plant species than grazed marshes, and had similar or lower plant diversity.
Characteristic plant richness/diversity (1 study): One site comparison study of ephemeral pools in Morocco found that pools fenced to exclude livestock for &gt;30 years contained a similar number of wetland-characteristic plant species to pools that remained grazed.
Native/non-target richness/diversity (3 studies): Of three replicated, randomized, paired, controlled studies that reported data on native plant species richness, two studies (based on one experimental set-up) in the USA found that fencing ephemeral pools to exclude cattle for 1–10 years typically reduced native plant species richness. The other study, also in the USA, found that native plant species richness was similar in marshes fenced to exclude cattle for 1–3 years and marshes that remained grazed.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (3 studies): Two replicated, site comparison studies in the USA and Morocco found that ponds/pools fenced to exclude cattle for &gt;10 years contained more vegetation than sites that remained grazed. This was measured in terms of emergent cover around pond margins or peak above-ground biomass in ephemeral pools. One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in Australia found that marshes fenced to exclude cattle for ≤4 years contained similar above-ground vegetation biomass to marshes that remained grazed.
Characteristic plant abundance (1 study): One site comparison study of ephemeral pools in Morocco found that the overall abundance of wetland-characteristic plant species was greater in pools fenced to exclude livestock for &gt;30 years than in pools that remained grazed.
Herb abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in the USA found that fencing pastures to exclude cattle typically increased herb cover in wetlands along creeks, but had no significant effect on herb cover within spring wetlands.
Individual species abundance (2 studies): Two replicated, randomized, paired, controlled studies in freshwater marshes in Australia and the USA quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species (see original papers for data).

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Visual obstruction (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that ponds fenced to exclude cattle for &gt;10 years had greater horizontal vegetation cover, around their margins, than ponds that remained grazed.
Height (2 studies): Two replicated studies (one also randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after) in the USA found that fencing ponds to exclude cattle, for 1–3 or &gt;10 years, increased the height of vegetation around their margins.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
