3432: Sow native grass and forbs
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Key Messages:

Fifty studies examined the effects of sowing native grass and forb seeds on grassland vegetation. Thirty-six studies were in Europe, twelve studies were in North America and one study was in New Zealand. One review included studies from Europe, North America and Africa.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY (42 STUDIES)

Community composition (11 studies): Five of 11 studies (10 of which were replicated and/or controlled, and three of which were site comparisons) in the UK, the Czech Republic, Norway and Germany found that sowing native grass and forb seeds increased the similarity of plant community composition to that of target communities. Three studies found no increase in community similarity to target communities. Two studies found that over time communities became more similar to those of intact grasslands. One study found that over time areas sown with native grass and forb seeds became more similar to areas that were not sown with seeds.
Overall richness/diversity (28 studies): Sixteen of 28 studies (24 of which were controlled and four of which were site comparisons) in Europe, North America and New Zealand found that sowing native grass and forb seeds increased overall plant species richness. Seven studies found that there was no change in plant species richness or mixed effects on plant species richness and plant diversity. Three studies found that sowing native grass and forb seeds increased plant species richness during the first year, but after 3–13 years, species richness did not differ between sown and unsown areas or was lower in sown areas. One study found that after one year, sowing did not alter plant species richness but after eight years, species richness was higher than in unsown areas. Three studies found that species richness was lower in sown areas than in nearby intact grasslands.
Characteristic plant richness/diversity (9 studies): Six of nine studies (eight of which were replicated and/or controlled, and two of which were site comparisons) in Europe found that sowing native grass and forb seeds increased the species richness of characteristic grassland plants. Two studies found no change in the species richness of characteristic grassland plants. One study found that sowing native grass and forb seeds increased the species richness of target forbs but not target grasses.
Sown/planted species richness/diversity (3 studies): Three replicated, paired, controlled studies in the UK and the Czech Republic found that sowing native grass and forb seeds increased sown species richness.
Grass richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the UK found that sowing native grass and forb seeds increased grass species richness in 54% of cases.
Forb richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the UK found that sowing native grass and forb seeds increased forb species richness in 71% of cases.
Native/non-target richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the USA found that sowing native grass and forb seeds increased the species richness of native plants.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE (24 STUDIES)

Overall abundance (8 studies): Three of eight replicated, controlled studies (four of which were randomized and paired) in Europe and North America found that sowing native grass and forb seeds increased overall vegetation cover, biomass or density. One study found that sowing native grass and forb seeds increased plant species richness during the first 2–7 years, but after eight years, species richness did not differ between sown and unsown areas. Four studies found that there was no change in overall vegetation abundance in all or most cases.
Characteristic plant abundance (5 studies): Three of five replicated studies (four of which were controlled, and one of which was a site comparison) in Europe found that sowing native grass and forb seeds did not alter the cover of characteristic grassland species. The other two studies found an increase in the cover of characteristic or target grassland species.
Sown/planted species abundance (6 studies): Five of six studies (four of which were replicated and controlled, and two of which were reviews) in Europe, North America, Africa and New Zealand found that sowing native grass and forb seeds increased the abundance of sown species in all or most cases. The other study found mixed effects on sown species abundance.
Grass abundance (3 studies): Two of three replicated, randomized, controlled studies (two of which were paired) in the Czech Republic and the USA found that sowing native grass and forb seeds increased the cover of grass species. The other study found no change in the cover of grass species.
Forb abundance (4 studies): Three of four replicated, randomized, controlled studies (three of which were paired) in the Czech Republic and the USA found that sowing native grass and forb seeds increased the cover or density of forb species. The other study found that one year after sowing, the cover of forb species increased, but after 10 years it did not differ between sown and unsown areas.
Native/non-target species abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the USA found that sowing native grass and forb seeds increased the cover of native plant species.
Individual plant species abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the UK found that sowing native grass and forb seeds did not alter yellow rattle abundance.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (2 STUDIES)

Germination/Emergence (2 studies): One of two replicated, controlled studies (one of which was paired) in the USA and Germany found that sowing native grass and forb seeds increased the number of seedlings that emerged. The other study found no change in seedling number.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Grassland Conservation
Description: Grassland Synopsis
