3265: Introduce seeds of non-woody plants: brackish/saline wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Key Messages:

Eight studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of introducing seeds of emergent, non-woody plants to brackish/saline wetlands. There were three studies in the USA, two in the Netherlands and two in China. The other study was a global systematic review.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Individual species abundance (4 studies): Four replicated studies quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. One study in an estuary in China also gave a before-and-after comparison, and reported higher density and biomass of seablite Suaeda salsa five months after sowing its seeds than on the bare sediment present before sowing.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (1 study): One replicated study on a mudflat in the Netherlands reported that the average height of surviving common cordgrass Spartina anglica plants increased, between one and six months after sowing cordgrass seeds.

OTHER           

Germination/emergence (5 studies): Five replicated studies in the Netherlands, the USA and China quantified germination rates of seeds sown into intertidal areas. Some seeds germinated in all five studies, at a rate of &lt;1% to 25%. Two studies reported that no seeds germinated for some species and/or in some environments.
Survival (3 studies): One replicated study in a salt marsh in the Netherlands quantified survival rates of individual germinated seedlings: 0–83% over their first growing season, depending on species and site conditions. Another replicated study in a salt marsh in the Netherlands reported that after two growing seasons, common cordgrass Spartina anglica was absent from 90% of plots in which had been sown. One global systematic review reported variable survival of herbs sown (or planted) in salt marshes: 0% to ≥95% after 20 days to 13 years, depending on the study.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
