3132: Exclude wild vertebrates: freshwater marshes
Effectiveness rating: Beneficial
Key Messages:

Twelve studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of physically excluding wild vertebrates from freshwater marshes. Six studies were in the USA. Three studies were in the Netherlands, two were in Australia and one was in Canada. The problematic vertebrates were birds in five studies, mammals in four studies, fish in one study, and mixed taxa in two studies. Two studies were conducted in the same area, but with different experimental set-ups.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall extent (1 study): One before-and-after study in a freshwater marsh in Canada found that after two years of excluding common carp Cyprinus carpio, the area of emergent vegetation was similar to the area expected based on the water level and historical data (when carp were present).
Community composition (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in freshwater marshes in Australia found that areas fenced to exclude wild mammals typically had a similar overall plant community composition to open areas, over 14 years.
Overall richness/diversity (4 studies): Three replicated, randomized, paired, controlled studies in freshwater marshes in the USA and Australia reported that fencing to exclude wild mammals had no clear or significant effect on total plant species richness. One replicated, paired, controlled study in freshwater marshes in the Netherlands found that fenced plots had higher emergent plant species richness than open plots, but similar diversity.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (7 studies): Seven replicated, controlled studies (three also randomized and paired) involving freshwater marshes in the USA, the Netherlands and Australia found that areas fenced to exclude wild vertebrates contained at least as much vegetation as open areas – and typically more. This was true for biomass (fenced &gt; open in six of six studies), cover (fenced &gt; open in two of two studies) and stem density (fenced similar to open in one of one studies). Vegetation was monitored over the winter immediately after fencing, or after 1–4 growing seasons.
Individual species abundance (8 studies): Eight studies quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. For example, seven replicated, controlled studies (four also paired, two also randomized) in freshwater marshes in the USA, the Netherlands and Australia found that dominant plant species had similar or greater abundance in areas fenced to exclude wild vertebrates, after 1–3 growing seasons, than in areas open to wild vertebrates. The dominant species included switchgrass Panicum virgatum, cordgrasses Spartina spp. and wild rice Zizania aquatica.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in freshwater marshes in the USA found that plots fenced to exclude Canada geese Branta canadensis contained taller wild rice Zizania aquatica than open plots in two of three comparisons. In the other comparison, after two years of goose control, fenced and open plots contained wild rice of a similar height.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
