3133: Exclude wild vertebrates: brackish/salt marshes
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Key Messages:

Seven studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of physically excluding wild vertebrates from brackish/salt marshes. Five studies were in the USA. The other studies were in France and Sweden. In five studies, the problematic vertebrates were mammals. In the other two studies, they were birds. Two of the studies were conducted in the same area, but with different experimental set-ups.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall richness/diversity (3 studies): Two replicated, paired, controlled studies in brackish marshes in the USA found that fencing to exclude nutria Myocastor coypus had no significant effect on total plant species richness: fenced and open plots contained a similar number of plant species after 1–2 growing seasons. One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in brackish marshes in the USA reported that excluding mammals typically had no significant effect on changes in plant species richness over two years.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (5 studies): Five replicated, paired, controlled studies involving brackish marshes in France and the USA found that fencing to exclude medium-large vertebrates maintained or increased overall vegetation abundance. Vegetation cover or biomass were compared between fenced and open plots, after 1–2 growing seasons or over the winter after fencing.
Individual species abundance (6 studies): Six studies quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. The six replicated, controlled studies in brackish and salt marshes in France, Sweden and the USA reported that fencing to exclude medium-large mammals typically maintained or increased the abundance of the dominant herb species over 1–4 growing seasons. Four of the studies found that fenced and open plots contained a similar abundance (biomass, cover or density) of cordgrasses Spartina spp. Three of the studies found that bulrushes Schoenoplectus spp./Scirpus spp. were more abundant in fenced than open plots. However, one study reported no clear difference in bulrush abundance between treatments and one study reported mixed effects depending on moisture levels and which mammals were excluded.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (3 studies): One replicated, paired, controlled study in a brackish marsh in France found that overall vegetation height increased over two years in plots fenced to exclude medium-large mammals, compared to a decline in plots left open. Two replicated, controlled studies in brackish and salt marshes in Sweden and the USA found that vertebrate exclusion did not reduce (i.e. maintained or increased) the height of dominant herb species over 2–4 growing seasons.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
