3471: Transplant or seed organisms onto subtidal artificial structures
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Definition: ‘Transplanting or seeding species’ includes actions taken to attach live organisms at any life stage onto structures, with the aim of generating self-sustaining populations.
Natural subtidal rocky habitats tend to support many more species than do artificial structures (Wilhelmsson & Malm 2008). Species can be transplanted or seeded directly onto structures with the aim of enhancing their biodiversity. The choice of species to transplant or seed depends on overarching management objectives. There may be value in transplanting rare, threatened, or commercially-valuable species to create artificial surrogate habitats for localized populations. Alternatively, keystone species such as primary producers, grazers, habitat-providers and water-quality regulators may be of interest to create productive and well-regulated artificial ecosystems. Species common to natural reefs may be the focus if, for example, larvae/spores cannot disperse far enough or hydrographic barriers (currents/tides) prevent recruitment, or to pre-empt potential non-native species invasions on new substrates.
When planning transplanting or seeding interventions, the method and timing of intervention and the suitability of the receiving environment should be carefully considered, as these factors may impact the likelihood of success. It is crucial to understand the reasons for a species’ absence in the first place. If, for example, a species has declined due to poor water quality and there has been no intervening improvement, there can be little expectation of successful recovery following transplanting or seeding (Stevenson et al. 1993). Similarly, species that naturally occur in wave-sheltered habitats should not be expected to survive and thrive on wave-exposed structures (Jonsson et al. 2006). Biological factors such as predation pressure, competition and food availability may also affect outcomes and should be understood prior to carrying out the intervention (Gianni et al. 2018).
There are bodies of literature describing transplanting or seeding species into natural or artificial subtidal habitats to investigate ecological processes and interactions (e.g. Clynick et al. 2007; Marzinelli et al. 2009), for aquaculture (e.g. James et al. 2007; Walls et al. 2019), biocontrol (e.g. Atalah et al. 2016), restoration in natural habitats (e.g. Edwards et al. 2015; Vanderklift et al. 2020) and artificial reefs (e.g. Noordin Raja Omar et al. 1994; Shelamoff et al. 2020). These studies are not included in this synopsis, which focusses on in situ conservation actions to enhance the biodiversity of structures that are engineered to fulfil a primary function other than providing artificial habitats.
Atalah J., Newcombe E.M. & Zaiko A. (2016) Biocontrol of fouling pests: effects of diversity, identity and density of control agents. Marine Environmental Research, 115, 20–27.
Clynick B.G., Chapman M.G. & Underwood A.J. (2007) Effects of epibiota on assemblages of fish associated with urban structures. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 332, 201–210.
Edwards A.J., Guest J.R., Heyward A.J., Villanueva R.D., Baria M.V., Bollozos I.S. & Golbuu Y. (2015) Direct seeding of mass-cultured coral larvae is not an effective option for reef rehabilitation. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 525, 105–116.
Gianni F., Bartolini F., Airoldi L. & Mangialajo L. (2018) Reduction of herbivorous fish pressure can facilitate focal algal species forestation on artificial structures. Marine Environmental Research, 138, 102–109.
James D.S., Day R.W. & Shepherd S.A. (2007) Experimental abalone ranching on artificial reef in Port Phillip Bay, Victoria. Journal of Shellfish Research, 26, 687–695.
Jonsson P.R., Granhag L., Moschella P.S., Åberg P., Hawkins S.J. & Thompson R.C. (2006) Interactions between wave action and grazing control the distribution of intertidal macroalgae. Ecology, 87, 1169–1178.
Marzinelli E.M., Zagal C.J., Chapman M.G. & Underwood A.J. (2009) Do modified habitats have direct or indirect effects on epifauna? Ecology, 90, 2948–2955.
Noordin Raja Omar R.M., Eng Kean C., Wagiman S., Mutalib Mat Hassan A., Hussein M., Bidin Raja Hassan R. & Omar Mat Hussin C. (1994) Design and construction of artificial reefs in Malaysia. Bulletin of Marine Science, 55, 1050–1061.
Shelamoff V., Layton C., Tatsumi M., Cameron M.J., Edgar G.J., Wright J.T. & Johnson C.R. (2020) Kelp patch size and density influence secondary productivity and diversity of epifauna. Oikos, 129, 331–345.
Stevenson J.C., Staver L.W. & Staver K.W. (1993) Water quality associated with survival of submersed aquatic vegetation along an estuarine gradient. Estuaries, 16, 346–361.
Venderklift M.A., Doropoulos C., Gorman D., Leal I., Minne A.J.P., Statton J., Steven A.D.L. & Wernberg T. (2020) Using propagules to restore coastal marine ecosystems. Frontiers in Marine Science, 7, 724.
Walls A.M., Edwards M.D., Firth L.B. & Johnson M.P. (2019) Ecological priming of artificial aquaculture structures: kelp farms as an example. Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, 99, 729–740.
Wilhelmsson D. & Malm T. (2008) Fouling assemblages on offshore wind power plants and adjacent substrata. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science, 79, 459–466.

Key Messages:

Eleven studies examined the effects of transplanting or seeding species onto subtidal artificial structures on the biodiversity of those structures. Eight studies were on open coastlines in Japan, Italy and Croatia, and one of each was in an inland bay in eastern USA, an estuary in southeast Australia, and on an island coastline in the Singapore Strait.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Overall community composition (1 study): One replicated, paired sites, controlled study in the USA found that transplanting oysters onto subtidal artificial structures altered the combined invertebrate and fish community composition on and around structure surfaces.
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, paired sites, controlled study in the USA found that transplanting oysters onto subtidal artificial structures increased the combined invertebrate and fish species richness and diversity on and around structure surfaces.
Invertebrate richness/diversity (1 study): One randomized, before-and-after study in Singapore reported that transplanting corals onto a subtidal artificial structure increased the coral species richness on structure surfaces.

POPULATION RESPONSE (11 STUDIES)

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, paired sites, controlled study in the USA found that transplanting oysters onto subtidal artificial structures did not increase the combined invertebrate and fish abundance on and around structure surfaces, but that the effects varied for different species.
Algal abundance (3 studies): Two replicated, randomized, controlled studies in Italy and Croatia found that the cover of canopy algae transplanted onto subtidal artificial structures increased and/or was higher when transplanted under cages but decreased and/or was lower when left uncaged. One study in Japan reported that the abundance of kelp recruits on a subtidal artificial structure varied depending on the distance from transplanted kelp individuals and the surface orientation.
Invertebrate abundance (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, controlled and site comparison study in Australia found that transplanting sea urchins onto a subtidal artificial structure reduced the cover of non-native sea mat on kelps growing on the structure. One randomized, before-and-after study in Singapore reported that transplanting corals increased the coral cover on structure surfaces.


Algal reproductive success (1 study): One study in Japan reported that kelp transplanted onto a subtidal artificial structure appeared to reproduce.
Invertebrate reproductive success (1 study): One replicated, paired sites, controlled study in the USA reported that oysters transplanted onto subtidal artificial structures appeared to reproduce.
Algal survival (5 studies): Three of five replicated studies (including two randomized, controlled studies) in Italy found that the survival of canopy algae transplanted onto subtidal artificial structures varied depending on the wave-exposure and surrounding habitat or the presence and/or mesh size of cages around transplants, while in one the surface orientation had no effect. Two studies reported that no canopy algae transplants survived, and in one this was regardless of the presence of cages.
Invertebrate survival (3 studies): One randomized, before-and-after study in Singapore found that the survival of corals transplanted onto a subtidal artificial structure varied depending on the species. One replicated, paired sites, controlled study in the USA found that cleaning activities did not affect survival of transplanted oysters. One replicated, randomized, controlled and site comparison study in Australia simply reported that transplanted sea urchins survived.
Algal condition (3 studies): Two replicated studies (including one randomized, controlled study) in Italy found that the growth of canopy algae transplanted onto subtidal artificial structures varied depending on the wave-exposure and surface orientation or the presence of cages around transplants, while in one the mesh size of cages had no effect. One study in Japan simply reported that transplanted kelp grew.
Invertebrate condition (2 studies): One randomized, before-and-after study in Singapore reported that the growth of corals transplanted onto a subtidal artificial structure varied depending on the species. One replicated, paired sites, controlled study in the USA reported that cleaning activities did not affect the growth of transplanted oysters.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Biodiversity of Marine Artificial Structures
Description: Enhancing biodiversity of marine artificial structures synopsis
