3461: Reduce the slope of intertidal artificial structures
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Definition: ‘Reducing the slope’ includes actions taken to reduce the inclination of structures without increasing the footprint, with the aim of enhancing their biodiversity.
The slope of substrate surfaces can influence the species that colonize in intertidal rocky habitats (Harmelin-Vivien et al. 1995; Vaselli et al. 2008; but see Cacabelos et al. 2016; Firth et al. 2016). Artificial structures tend to have steeper slopes than natural reefs, with narrower bands of intertidal habitat. This means that space for organisms is scarce and competitive interactions and other environmental processes differ (Chapman & Underwood 2011). Steep surfaces can also be associated with the presence of non-native species (Dafforn 2017).
Although fundamental aspects of structure designs, such as their slope, are likely to be driven by engineering and cost requirements, there may be opportunities to reduce the slope of intertidal artificial structure surfaces with the aim of enhancing their biodiversity. This may, however, lead to an increase in the physical footprint of structures and associated impacts on the receiving environment (Perkins et al. 2015). For this reason, studies that test the effects of creating additional artificial habitat in front of existing structures to create horizontal or gently sloping surfaces are not included in this synopsis, although such actions can deliver biodiversity benefits and are informative (e.g. Liversage & Chapman 2018; Toft et al. 2013).
See also: Create small protrusions (1–50 mm) on intertidal artificial structures; Create large protrusions (&gt;50 mm) on intertidal artificial structures; Create small ridges or ledges (1–50 mm) on intertidal artificial structures; Create large ridges or ledges (&gt;50 mm) on intertidal artificial structures.
Cacabelos E., Martins G.M., Thompson R., Prestes A.C.L., Azevedo J.M.N. & Neto A.I. (2016) Factors limiting the establishment of canopy-forming algae on artificial structures. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science, 181, 277–283.
Chapman M.G. & Underwood A.J. (2011) Evaluation of ecological engineering of “armoured” shorelines to improve their value as habitat. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology, 400, 302–313.
Dafforn K.A. (2017) Eco-engineering and management strategies for marine infrastructures to reduce establishment and dispersal of non-indigenous species. Management of Biological Invasions, 8, 153–161.
Firth L.B., White F.J., Schofield M., Hanley M.E., Burrows M.T., Thompson R.C., Skov M.W., Evans A.J., Moore P.J. & Hawkins S.J. (2016) Facing the future: the importance of substratum features for ecological engineering of artificial habitats in the rocky intertidal. Marine and Freshwater Research, 67, 131–143.
Harmelin-Vivien M.L., Harmelin J.G. & Leboulleux V. (1995) Microhabitat requirements for settlement of juvenile sparid fishes on Mediterranean rocky shores. Hydrobiologia, 300, 309–320.
Liversage K. & Chapman M.G. (2018) Coastal ecological engineering and habitat restoration: incorporating biologically diverse boulder habitat. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 593, 173–185.
Perkins M.J., Ng T.P.T., Dudgeon D., Bonebrake T.C. & Leung K.M.Y. (2015) Conserving intertidal habitats: what is the potential of ecological engineering to mitigate impacts of coastal structures? Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science, 167, 504–515.
Toft J.D., Ogston A.S., Heerhartz S.M., Cordell J.R. & Flemer E.E. (2013) Ecological response and physical stability of habitat enhancements along an urban armored shoreline. Ecological Engineering, 57, 97–108.
Vaselli S., Bertocci I., Maggi E. & Benedetti-Cecchi L. (2008) Assessing the consequences of sea level rise: effects of changes in the slope of the substratum on sessile assemblages of rocky seashores. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 368, 9–22.

Key Messages:

Two studies examined the effects of reducing the slope of intertidal artificial structures on the biodiversity of those structures. The studies were in an estuary in southeast Australia.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One before-and-after study in Australia reported that reducing the slope of an intertidal artificial structure, along with creating rock pools, increased the combined macroalgae, invertebrate and fish species richness on the structure.

POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Algal abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Australia found that reducing the slope of an intertidal artificial structure did not increase the macroalgal abundance on structure surfaces.
Invertebrate abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Australia found that reducing the slope of an intertidal artificial structure did not increase the oyster or mobile invertebrate abundance on structure surfaces.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Biodiversity of Marine Artificial Structures
Description: Enhancing biodiversity of marine artificial structures synopsis
