1768: Physically remove problematic plants
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
This section considers complete physical removal of problematic plants i.e. pulling up or digging up entire plants, or scraping living vegetation from the peatland surface. By completely removing plants, including roots where applicable, immediate regrowth will be prevented (although long-term recolonization is possible).
Physical removal can precisely target individuals of problematic species. Alternatively, it can involve broad clearance of dominant vegetation that outcompetes desirable plants or changes the physical environment to an undesirable state (e.g. acidification and nutrient enrichment by moss carpets on fens; Bootsma et al. 2002).
Key peatland types where this action may be appropriate: bogs, fens/fen meadows, tropical peat swamps.
Related actions: remove or bury upper layer of peat or soil, which will also involve removal of existing plants.
Bootsma M.C., van den Broek T., Barendregt A. & Beltman B. (2002) Rehabilitation of acidified floating fens by addition of buffered surface water. Restoration Ecology, 10, 112–121.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects on peatland vegetation of removing problematic plants. All three studies were in fens.
Characteristic plants (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in a fen in Ireland reported that cover of fen-characteristic plants increased after mossy vegetation was removed.
Herb cover (3 studies): Three replicated, controlled studies in fens in the Netherlands and Ireland reported mixed effects of moss removal on herb cover after 2–5 years. Results varied between species or between sites, and sometimes depended on other treatments applied to plots (i.e. drainage or isolation from the surrounding bog).
Moss cover (3 studies): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in a fen in Ireland reported that removing the moss carpet reduced total bryophyte and Sphagnum moss cover for three years. Two replicated, controlled, before-and-after studies in fens in the Netherlands reported that removing the moss carpet had no effect on moss cover (after 2–5 years) in wet plots, but reduced total moss and Sphagnum cover in drained plots.
Overall plant richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in a fen in the Netherlands reported that moss removal increased plant species richness, but only in a drained area.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
