1833: Reprofile/relandscape peatland (before planting)
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
The peatland surface could be modified before introducing vegetation to create a more suitable environment for vegetation growth. In particular, local moisture levels could be raised by excavating shallow basins (removing &lt;30 cm of surface peat and pushing it into ridges). At the same time, drier mounds of peat can be flattened. Steep gully sides or eroding slopes can be reprofiled into shallower, more stable slopes.
Caution: Heavy machinery used for landscaping may churn and compress the peat soil, damaging its structure. Removing surface peat from bogs may expose fen peat, which has different chemical properties to bog peat and will not (in the short term) support bog vegetation (Lindsay & Clough 2016).
Key peatland types where this action may be appropriate: bogs, fens/fen meadows, tropical peat swamps.
Related actions: reprofile/relandscape without introducing vegetation; raise water table to complement planting; create small mounds or hollows in peat before planting; remove upper layer of peat/soil before planting, without further reprofiling.
Lindsay R.A. & Clough J. (2016) A review of the influence of ombrotrophic peat depth on the successful restoration of bog habitat. Scottish Natural Heritage Commissioned Report 925.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects, on peatland vegetation, of reprofiling or relandscaping before planting peatland plants. All four studies were in bogs.
Survival (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in a bog in Canada found that survival of sown Sphagnum mosses was higher, after one growing season, in reprofiled basins than on raised plots.
Cover (3 studies): Two replicated, controlled, before-and-after studies in bogs in Canada found that reprofiled basins had higher Sphagnum cover than raised plots, 3–4 growing seasons after sowing Sphagnum-dominated vegetation fragments. However, one controlled study in a bog in Estonia reported that total Sphagnum cover did not differ between reprofiled and raised plots, 1–2 years after sowing. All three studies found that reprofiled and raised plots developed similar cover of other mosses/bryophytes and vascular plants.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
