3699: Remove or control toxic invasive amphibians (e.g. cane toads, Asian toads)
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Invasive amphibians such as the cane toad Bufo marinus pose a threat to predatory reptiles (including crocodiles, snakes, varanid and scincid lizards) due to their toxicity (Shine & Wiens 2010). Reductions of predatory reptiles caused by cane toads may also have knock-on effects that lead to wider changes in native reptile communities (Feit et al. 2020). A range of methods for controlling cane toads, including biological control, have been proposed (e.g. Shanmuganathan et al. 2010; Ward-Fear et al. 2010).
Feit B., Dempster T., Jessop T.S., Webb J.K. & Letnic M. (2020) A trophic cascade initiated by an invasive vertebrate alters the structure of native reptile communities. Global change biology, 26, 2829–2840.
Shanmuganathan T., Pallister J., Doody S., McCallum H., Robinson T., Sheppard A., Hardy C., Halliday D., Venables D., Voysey R., Strive T., Hinds L. & Hyatt A. (2010) Biological control of the cane toad in Australia: a review. Animal Conservation, 13, 16–23.
Shine R. & Wiens J.J. (2010) The ecological impact of invasive cane toads (Bufo marinus) in Australia. The Quarterly review of biology, 85, 253–291.
Ward-Fear G., Brown G.P. & Shine R. (2010) Using a native predator (the meat ant, Iridomyrmex reburrus) to reduce the abundance of an invasive species (the cane toad, Bufo marinus) in tropical Australia. Journal of Applied Ecology, 47, 273–280.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of removing or controlling toxic invasive amphibians on reptile populations.

‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
