2301: (CFT) Wetland plants: Extensive grazing (29a)
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:


Key Messages:
Plants (3 studies)

Abundance (3 studies): Two replicated, randomized, and controlled studies in wetlands in the USA found higher cover of some species of plants, herbaceous plants, or native plants in areas grazed by cattle at lower, compared to higher, intensities. A replicated, randomized, controlled study in forested pastures in central California, USA, found no difference in plant cover on stream banks and surrounding grass between pastures moderately and intensively grazed by cattle.
Diversity (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in wetland in the USA and Israel found lower plant diversity in sites with low grazing intensity compared to medium grazing intensity and also found higher diversity in some comparisons and lower diversity in others. One replicated, randomized, controlled study in wet grasslands in the USA found that plant community composition differed in sites with different cattle-grazing intensities, in some comparisons. 


Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, randomized controlled study in 1993–2002 in wetlands in central California, USA, found lower plant diversity in one of two habitats in lightly, compared to moderately, grazed plots. Herbaceous plant cover increased in lightly, but decreased in moderately, grazed plots. Species composition of plant communities differed, but variability did not, between lightly and moderately grazed plots for one of two habitats. Plants: Two measures of plant diversity were lower in lightly, compared to moderately, grazed plots alongside creeks, but not at springs (data reported as model results). Herbaceous plant cover increased over time in lightly grazed plots, but decreased in moderately grazed plots (data reported as model results). The species composition of plant communities varied between lightly and moderately grazed plots (data reported as ordination results). Plant community variability did not differ between lightly and moderately grazed plots (data presented as coefficients of variation). Methods: In 1993, three wetlands in each of three watersheds were assigned to either light grazing (reducing dry matter to 250 g/m2) or moderate grazing (reducing dry matter to 150 g/m2). Plots of 2–5 ha were established at springs and creeks in each wetland. Vegetation biomass was sampled each year in 1993–1998 from three 0.0625 m2 quadrats in each plot and plant communities sampled with transects in 1993–2002.
A replicated, randomized, controlled study in 1995–1998 in forested pastures in central California, USA, found no difference in plant cover on stream banks or in grassy areas in pastures grazed by cattle in the dry season, compared to the wet season. Plants: There was no difference in plant cover on stream banks or in the surrounding grassy areas between pastures grazed in the dry season, compared to the wet season (31–84%). Methods: Two pastures in each of three streams were assigned to either dry- or wet-season grazing (July–October and October/November–May, respectively). Half of each were grazed at moderate intensity, and half at high intensity (reducing stubble to 2–3 and &lt;2 inches, respectively). Plant cover was measured in June, on 10 transects running across the streams.
A replicated, randomized, controlled study in 1992–2002 in grazed wetlands in northern California, USA, found more families of aquatic insects in streams in lightly, compared to moderately, grazed plots. There were no differences in the number of plant species or the relative cover of native and non-native species, although diversity and community composition in one of two habitats did differ between grazing intensities and total plant cover was lower in moderately grazed plots. Invertebrates: There were more families of insects in streams in lightly grazed plots, compared to moderately grazed plots (data not provided). Plants: There were no differences in the number of plant species or the relative cover of native and non-native species (data not reported). Diversity relative to before the experiment was higher in lightly grazed plots, compared to moderately grazed plots. Plant community composition varied between lightly and moderately grazed plots along creeks, but not at springs, in wetlands (data reported as ordination scores). Plant cover at the end of the experiment was higher in lightly grazed, compared to moderately grazed, plots (data not provided). Methods: Three meadows were studied, with three watersheds in each randomly assigned to a grazing intensity: one with cattle excluded, one with light grazing (leaving 800–1,000 pounds of residual dry matter at the end of the season) and one with moderate grazing (leaving 600–700 pounds). Samples were taken from both the spring and along the creek in each watershed. Insects were surveyed every three months in one year. Plants were surveyed each June using line transects.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Cool Farm Biodiversity
Description: 
