2425: Train and support local staff to help reduce persecution of mammals
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Carnivores may be killed by farmers where they feel that their livestock are threatened. National laws or policies protecting wild mammals may be difficult to enforce at a local level. Local staff, from among the same communities as the farmers, may be able to gain more respect and to work more closely with farmers to find ways to reduce losses to predators without carrying out lethal control.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects of training and supporting local staff to help reduce persecution of mammals. This study was in Kenya.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Survival (1 study): A replicated, before-and-after study in Kenya found that employing local tribesmen to dissuade pastoralists from killing lions and to assist with livestock protection measures, alongside compensating for livestock killed by lions, reduced lion killings by pastoralists.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, before-and-after study in 2003–2011 in savanna grassland in four ranches in southern Kenya (Hazzah et al. 2014) found that employing local tribesmen to dissuade pastoralists from killing lions Panthera leo and to assist with livestock protection measures, alongside compensating for livestock killed by lions, reduced lion killings by pastoralists. The two schemes occurred at the same time at three group ranches, so their individual effects could not be separated. Compensation for livestock losses was estimated to reduce lion killing by 87–91% whilst additionally employing lion guardians reduced killings by 99%. The four ranches comprised a 3,500-km2 study area. Compensation for verified livestock losses to lions was initiated at three of the group ranches between 2003 and 2008. Respected tribesmen, ‘lion guardians’, were employed to dissuade pastoralists from killing lions and to assist with livestock protection measures, such as reinforcing bomas. The scheme commenced at the four sites between 2007 and 2010. Lion mortality data, from 2003 to 2011, were collated primarily from community informants and direct interviews with lion hunters.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
