1088: Ponto-Caspian gammarids: Control movement of gammarids
Effectiveness rating: Unlikely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Containment of invasive gammarids can help to prevent their spread both within the invaded waterway and also reduce the likelihood of them being transported into new waterbodies.
 

Key Messages:

A replicated, controlled laboratory study in the USA found that movements of invasive freshwater shrimp slowed down or stopped when they were placed in water that had been exposed to different species of predatory fish, compared to those not exposed to fish. 
A replicated laboratory study in the UK found carbonating the water stunned invasive killer shrimp.

 

Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, controlled experimental study conducted in 2008, on specimens from a canal in the USA (Pennuto & Keppler 2008) found that movement of invasive freshwater shrimp Echinogammarus ischnus, slowed down or stopped when exposed to water that had previously contained predatory fishes.  Movement patterns were significantly lower when compared with a control treatment, i.e. fish-free water. Increased avoidance behaviour was associated with increased density of fishes previously in the water. The treatment water had been in contact with either the round goby Apollonia melanostoma, yellow perch Perca flavescens, black crappie Promoxis nigromaculatus, rainbow darter Etheostoma caeruleum or the brown bullhead Ameiurus nebulosus. One shrimp was put in each of two tanks (7 x 7 cm) containing 1 cm deep freshwater. One tank was fed with water from a 40 l tank containing 1-10 fishes at 2 ml/second over a 30 second period. The other tank was fed with water without fish. Shrimp movements were observed and measured.
A controlled laboratory study conducted in 2011 in England, UK (Stebbing et al. 2011) found that carbonating water did not kill the invasive killer shrimp Dikerogammarus villosus but 100% of the shrimps were stunned (stopped moving). A test group of five captive shrimp was immersed in carbonated water for 15 minutes. Dead and live shrimp were counted.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species
Description: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species Synopsis
