2634: Allow forest to regenerate naturally following logging
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
After logging of forests, cut areas may be left to regenerate naturally or may be subject to management aimed at accelerating tree planting. Allowing natural regeneration may facilitate formation of more natural vegetation which could improve habitat and resource availability for mammals.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects on mammals of allowing forest to regenerate naturally following logging. This study was in Canada.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Abundance (1 study): A replicated, site comparison study in Canada found that, natural forest regeneration increased moose numbers relative to more intensive management in the short- to medium-term but not in the longer term.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, site comparison study, in 2008–2009, on three large adjacent coniferous forest sites in Ontario, Canada (Boan et al. 2011) found that, following clearcutting, large-scale natural forest regeneration increased moose Alces alces numbers relative to more intensive silvicultural practices (mechanical ground preparation, replanting and herbicide application) 10 years after felling but not 30 years after felling. The number of moose faecal pellet clumps was positively correlated with the extent of naturally regenerating forest that was felled 10 years previously in areas of 10, 20 and 40 km2 around the stand, but not with the extent subject to more intensive silviculture, nor with the extent felled 30 years previously and subject to either management practice (data not presented). Ten forest stands were felled 10 years previously (five regenerating naturally and five subject to intensive silviculture) and ten were felled 30 years previously (five regenerating naturally and five subject to intensive silviculture). Moose faecal pellet clumps were counted within five circles of 5.65 m radius in each stand between July and early September of 2008 or 2009.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
