3379: Physically damage tree/shrub seeds before sowing: brackish/saline wetlands
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Damaging, weakening or softening the coating of seeds before planting can help to break seed dormancy and encourage germination. For species with physical dormancy, damage to the seed coat can increase its permeability to water and gases, which are essential for germination. For a database of seed dormancy class by species, see Baskin & Baskin (2014).
This action includes mechanically damaging seeds (e.g. by rubbing them with sandpaper or nicking them with a knife) and removing excess tissues from around the seed (e.g. the sac-like perigynia around sedge seeds). To be summarized as evidence for this action, studies must have explicitly compared the performance of treated and untreated seeds. Studies that simply report the performance of treated seeds are not summarized here. Studies do not have to be in flooded/saturated soils, as long as they involve wetland-characteristic species.
Related actions: Soak seeds before sowing; Chill seeds before sowing; Heat seeds before sowing; Expose seeds to light before sowing; Treat seeds with chemicals before sowing.
Baskin C.C. & Baskin J.M. (2014) Seeds: Ecology, Biogeography and Evolution of Dormancy and Germination, Second Edition. Academic Press.

Key Messages:
We found no studies that evaluated the effects – on trees/shrubs typical of brackish/saline wetlands – of physically damaging their seeds before sowing.
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
