2313: (CFT) Predatory invertebrates: Plant flowers (16c, 20c)
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:


Key Messages:
Natural enemy numbers (5 studies): Two replicated studies from the USA found more natural enemies in fields with planted flower strips, compared to fields without planted flower strips, in some comparisons. Two replicated, controlled studies from Italy found more natural enemies in planted flower strips than on bare ground, and one of these studies also found more species of natural enemies
One replicated, controlled study from Spain found more pollinators (Including hoverflies and beetles) on coriander flowers next to planted flower strips, compared to coriander flowers next to unplanted field margins.

Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, randomized, controlled study in 2011–2012 in an organic tomato field near Pisa, Italy found more individuals and species of natural enemies in flower strips, compared to bare ground. Natural enemy numbers: More individuals and species of ground-dwelling predators were found in flower strips than on bare ground (16–19 vs 4 individuals; numbers of species not reported). Methods: Four treatments were compared: three flower species/strip (Apiaceae species), six species/strip (three Apiaceae and three Fabaceae), nine species/strip (three Apiaceae, three Fabaceae, and three others), and a control strip with no flowers. Three strips/treatment were sown with flower seeds (2011: 6 and 21 June; 2012: 13 and 17 June). Each flower strip (2 x 4 m) was positioned between two tomato plots (4 x 10 m/plot). Ground-dwelling predators were sampled with pitfall traps every 7 days, and natural enemies on flowers were sampled with aspirators every 14 days, after flowering began. 
A replicated, controlled study in 2011 in an organic tomato field near Pisa, Italy (same study as (8)), found more natural enemies in flower plots than on bare ground. Plots with the most flower species had the fewest tomato pests but the most generalist pests, and plots with different numbers of flower species had similar numbers of natural enemies. Natural enemy numbers: More ground-dwelling predators were found in flower plots than on bare ground (carabid beetles/plot: 0–28.7 vs 0–1.2; staphylinid beetles/plot 0.5–7.4 vs 0–0.4; spiders/plot: 0.4–7.1 vs 0.2–1.5). Implementation options: Fewer tomato pests (sap-sucking bugs), but more generalist pests (Lygus sp. and Nezara viridula), were found on flowers in plots with nine flower species, compared to plots with three flower species (numbers of individuals not reported). Similar numbers of natural enemies were found on flowers in all plots (numbers of individuals not reported). On flowers, predatory beetles Hippodamia variegata and parasitic wasps increased over time (beetles: minimum: 0 individuals/plot, on the first day of flowering; maximum: 2.7 individuals/plot, 38 days after flowering; wasps: minimum: 0 individuals/plot, on the first day after flowering; maximum: 36.5 individuals/plot, 21 days after flowering), but formicid ants decreased over time (numbers of individuals not reported). On the ground, carabid beetles increased over time (minimum: 0 individuals/plot, nine days after flowering; maximum: 28.7 individuals/plot, 37 days after flowering), but staphylinid beetles and spiders did not. Methods: Four treatments were compared: three, six, or nine flower species/plot, and a control with no flowers. Five plots/treatment were sown with flower seeds on 6 and 21 June. Each flower plot (2 x 10 m) was next to a tomato plot (4 x 10 m). Ground-dwelling predators were sampled with pitfall traps every 7 days, and natural enemies on flowers were sampled with aspirators every 14 days, after flowering began.
A replicated before-and-after study in 2007 in lettuce fields in the Salinas Valley, California, USA, found more pests, more predators, and different distributions of predators after restoring floral resources compared to before. Pest and natural enemy numbers: After restoring sweet alyssum Lobularia maritima rows, there were more pests (12.5 vs 8.5 currant-lettuce aphids Nasonovia ribisnigri per lettuce) and more hoverfly eggs and larvae (2.3 vs 1.2 eggs/lettuce; 1.4 vs 0.8 larvae/lettuce) than there were before (second sampling dates). After restoration, there were more hoverfly adults near restored flower strips (72 vs 57), but fewer elsewhere in the field (60–76 vs 77–95), than there were before. Methods: Flower strips were planted 48 m apart on four lettuce fields. Access to one flower strip/field was restricted (strips were covered on 31 August) and then restored (covers were removed on 5 September). Insects were sampled (2–5 days after restriction and restoration) by searching lettuce heads or by counting hoverflies on transects.
A replicated, randomized, controlled study in 2003 in organic tomato fields in the Sacramento Valley, California, USA, found that a higher percentage of stink-bug eggs were parasitized near planted flower borders than near bare borders. Pest regulation: Parasitism of consperse stink bug Euschistus conspersus eggs was significantly higher near borders planted with sweet alyssum Lobularia maritima than it was near bare borders in September (41 vs 22%), but not in July or August (early July: 9 vs 6%; late July–early August: 47 vs 40%). Natural enemy numbers: There were not significantly more predators near flower borders, compared to bare borders (3 vs 2–5 individuals/sample), except for spined stilt bugs Jalysus wickhami in June (2 vs 0). Methods: In each of four tomato fields, one 23 m border was planted with 60 alyssum plants and one border was tilled and left bare. Eight (3 and 31 July) or ten (5 September) masses of stink bug eggs were placed on the undersides of tomato leaves at each of three distances (0.3, 6, and 15 m) from each border. Yellow sticky traps were placed at four (18 June: 0.3, 1.5, 6, and 15 m) or three (26 August: 0.3, 6, and 15 m) distances, to sample predators. Eggs and cards were collected after 6–7 days.
A replicated, controlled study in 2013 in coriander plots near Madrid, Spain, found more pollinators on coriander flowers next to planted flower strips than on coriander flowers next to unplanted field margins. Crop visitation: More pollinators (bees, beetles, and syrphid flies) were found on coriander flowers next to flower strips than on coriander flowers next to unplanted margins (1.2–1.6 vs 0.2 pollinators/minute). Implementation options: Similar numbers of pollinators were found on coriander flowers next to flower strips with one flower species, compared to six (1.2 vs 1.6 pollinators/minute). More pollinators were found in flower strips with one flower species, compared to six (1.6 vs 0.4 pollinators/minute). Methods: Potted coriander plants were transplanted into the field on 1 May 2013, one month before flowering. Fifteen pots were buried 1.5 m from three field margins with one flower species (Diplotaxis tenuifolia), three margins with six flower species, or three unplanted margins (135 pots total). All margins were 1.5 x 15 m. Flowers were planted in autumn 2012. Pollinators were observed twice/week (3–21 June, 12 minutes/field, nine minutes/field margin), and were counted only if they touched the reproductive parts of flowers.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Cool Farm Biodiversity
Description: 
