2193: Reduce the amount of pesticides used in aquaculture systems
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Pesticides are used in aquaculture to reduce or eliminate pests. For example, the carbaryl pesticide Sevin is commonly used in the USA to control ghost shrimp Callianassa californiensis and mud shrimp Upogebia pugettensis in oyster culture (Weston 2000). Pesticides, however, have the potential to negatively impact non-target species, such as subtidal benthic invertebrates. This has been shown in the salmon aquaculture, where pesticides used against sea lice caused harm to crustaceans and worms (Mayor et al. 2009; Waddy et al. 2002). The risks associated with the use of pesticides can be reduced by applying them smaller doses, less frequently or across a smaller area. This may reduce the negative effects on subtidal benthic invertebrates.
Evidence for interventions related to the use of antibiotics are summarised under “Threat: Pollution – Reduce the amount of antibiotics used in aquaculture systems”.
 
Mayor D. J., Solan M., Martinez I., Murray L., McMillan H., Paton G. I. & Killham K. (2008). Acute toxicity of some treatments commonly used by the salmonid aquaculture industry to Corophium volutator and Hediste diversicolor: Whole sediment bioassay tests. Aquaculture, 285, 102–108.
Waddy S. L., Burridge L.E., Hamilton M.N., Mercer S.M., Aiken D.E. & Haya K. (2002) Emamectin benzoate induces molting in American lobster, Homarus americanus. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 59, 1096–1099.
Weston D.P. (2000). Ecological effects of the use of chemicals in aquaculture. Pages 23–30, in: J.R. Arthur, C.R. Lavilla-Pitogo, & R.P. Subasinghe (Eds.) Use of Chemicals in Aquaculture in Asia: Proceedings of the Meeting on the Use of Chemicals in Aquaculture in Asia. 20-22 May 1996. Tigbauan, Iloilo, Philippines: Aquaculture Department, Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of reducing the amount of pesticides used in aquaculture systems on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
