3823: Prohibit high grading in which only the most profitable individuals or species are landed
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
High grading is the practice by fishers of discarding marketable fish that have the lowest commercial value so they can land more fish of higher value (e.g. to maximise profit). It occurs in fisheries managed by catch limits (e.g. quotas/catch shares) or by measures requiring the landing of their total catch. Because survival of the discarded fish can be low, a ban on high grading may reduce overall fishing effort and mortality. In 2009, high grading was made an illegal practice in European Union waters. However, there is evidence that suggests its effectiveness may depend on the ability to detect and enforce it (Batsleer et al. 2015).
Batsleer J., Hamon K.G., van Overzee H.M.J., Rijnsdorp A.D. & Poos J.J. (2015) High-grading and over-quota discarding in mixed fisheries. Reviews in Fish Biology and Fisheries, 25, 715–736.

Key Messages:

One study examined the effects of prohibiting high grading in which only the most profitable individuals or species are landed on marine fish populations. The study was in the North Sea/North Atlantic Ocean (UK).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (1 STUDY)

Commercial catch abundance/landings (1 study): One replicated, before-and-after study in the North Sea/North Atlantic Ocean reported that a ban on high grading did not eliminate the discarding of legal-sized but unwanted common megrim Lepidorhombus whiffiagonis that were required to be landed.


Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, before-and-after study in 2008–2012 of a fished area of seabed in the North Sea/North Atlantic Ocean, UK (Macdonald et al. 2014) reported that a ban on high grading did not prevent the discarding of legal-sized but unwanted common megrim Lepidorhombus whiffiagonis that were required to be landed. Data were not tested statistically. Across all catches, the proportion of megrim above minimum landing size discarded and classed as “bruised” remained widespread both after (2010–2012) and before (2008–2009) high grading was prohibited (after: 0.10–0.15, before: 0.13–0.15). Similarly, legal-sized but “small” megrim continued to be discarded, but in increasingly lower proportions (after: 0.1–0.36, before: 0.32–0.39). High grading was prohibited in the North Sea in 2009 and meant that any species managed under quotas (such as megrim) was required to be landed if above minimum landing size. Data were collected by on board sampling of catches on eight demersal (bottom) fishing vessels based in the Shetland Islands, Scotland, and working in the mixed demersal fishery in the northern North Sea/North Atlantic Ocean (International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES) Division IVa). Observer trips (2–8 d) were undertaken between May 2008 and March 2012. A total of 25 trips (22 twin trawl and 3 seine) and 407 hauls were sampled. Megrim length was recorded from the retained and discarded portions of the catch. Discards were categorized as “small” or “bruised”.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
