2236: Designate a Marine Protected Area and prohibit the harvesting of scallops
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Commercial (and often recreational) harvest of scallops is usually undertaken using dredges, and as such can impact subtidal benthic invertebrates through removal of untargeted species and damage to the seabed (Bull 1989). Specific areas can be designated as protected, and specific management measures taken to cease or prohibit the commercial and/or recreational harvest of scallops (Mangi et al. 2011). Inside protected areas where this activity is prohibited, the threat from scallop harvesting to scallop populations and associated benthic communities is removed, and previously impacted populations are, in theory, able to recover over time. However, species and populations are still subjected to the effects of other activities allowed.
Evidence related to similar intervention outside of a protected area are summarised under “Species management – Cease or prohibit harvest of scallops”, and “Threat: Biological resource use – Cease or prohibit dredging”.
 
Bull M.F. (1989) The New Zealand scallop fishery: a brief review of the fishery and its management. Edited by: MLC Dredge, WF Zacharin and LM Joli, 42.
Mangi S.C., Rodwell L.D. & Hattam C. (2011) Assessing the impacts of establishing MPAs on fishermen and fish merchants: the case of Lyme Bay, UK. Ambio, 40, 457.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of designating a Marine Protected Area and prohibiting the harvest of scallops on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
