3373: Heat tree/shrub seeds before sowing: freshwater wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Heating seeds before planting can help to break seed dormancy and encourage germination. Seeds of some species (with physiological dormancy) must experience high temperatures before germinating, in order to break down chemicals that inhibit germination or stop the production of these chemicals. For other species (with physical dormancy), heat can increase the permeability of the seed coat to water and gases, which are essential for germination. For a database of seed dormancy class by species, see Baskin & Baskin (2014).
To be summarized as evidence for this action, studies must have explicitly compared the performance of treated and untreated seeds. Studies that simply report the performance of treated seeds are not summarized here. Studies do not have to be in flooded/saturated soils, as long as they involve wetland-characteristic species.
Related actions: Soak seeds before sowing; Chill seeds before sowing; Expose seeds to light before sowing; Physically damage seeds before sowing; Treat seeds with chemicals before sowing.
Baskin C.C. & Baskin J.M. (2014) Seeds: Ecology, Biogeography and Evolution of Dormancy and Germination, Second Edition. Academic Press.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects – on trees/shrubs typical of freshwater wetlands – of heating their seeds before sowing. The study was in a laboratory in the USA.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE
 
VEGETATION STRUCTURE    
    
OTHER

Germination/emergence (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in a laboratory in the USA found that heating baldcypress Taxodium distichum seeds in a flame before sowing reduced their germination rate.


Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, controlled study in 2004 in a laboratory in Florida, USA (Liu et al. 2009) found that heating baldcypress Taxodium distichum seeds in a flame reduced their germination rate. Heated seeds had a lower germination rate (0% germinated) than unheated seeds (47% germinated). Methods: In August 2004, sixty baldcypress seeds were planted into trays of growing medium. All seeds had been stored at 4°C for four months before the experiment started, and soaked in distilled water for 24 h before planting. Thirty seeds (three replicates of 10 seeds) had also been held in a gas flame for 3 sec before soaking.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
