1746: Use low impact vehicles for harvesting (wild biological resources)
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Vehicles used to cut and transport peatland vegetation can be damaging to the peatland. They can compress, sink into and create ruts in the wet peat soils (Schröder et al. 2015). Using specialised tracked vehicles or hovercraft may reduce pressure on soils and mitigate some physical damage (Dubowski et al. 2013). To be included as evidence in this section, studies must have compared alternative low impact vehicles with traditional vehicles.
Caution: Even specially designed vehicles could alter the chemistry of the peatland by crushing vegetation and forcing it under water (Banaszuk et al. 2016).
Key peatland types where this action may be appropriate: bogs, fens/fen meadows, tropical peat swamps.
Related actions: restrict vehicle use on peatlands; allow sustainable use of peatlands.
Banaszuk P., Kamocki A. & Zarzecki R. (2016) Mowing with invasive machinery can affect chemistry and trophic state of a rheophilous mire. Ecological Engineering, 86, 31–38.
Dubowski A.P., Zembrowski K., Rakowicz A., Palowski T., Weymann S. & Wojnilowicz L. (2013) Developing new-generation machinery for vegetation management on protected wetlands in Poland. Mires and Peat, 13, Article 11.
Schröder C., Dahms T., Paulitz J., Wichtmann W. & Wichmann S. (2015) Towards large-scale paludiculture: addressing the challenges of biomass harvesting in wet and rewetted peatlands. Mires and Peat, 16, Article 13.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects, on peatland vegetation, of using specialized low impact vehicles for harvesting (wild biological resources).

‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
