2302: (CFT) Wetland plants: Allow resting time between grazing periods (29b)
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:


Key Messages:
Plants (2 studies)

Abundance (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, controlled before-and-after study in wet grasslands in the USA found no difference in the relative cover of native plants in pool edges in wet season grazed versus continullay grazed plots. One replicated, randomized, controlled study from forested pastures in the USA found no difference in plant cover on stream banks between areas grazed at different times.
Diversity (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled before-and-after study in wet grasslands in the USA found greater declines in native plant species richness in pool edges in wet season grazed versus continually grazed plots.


Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, randomized, controlled before-and-after study in 2000–2003 in wet grassland in central California, USA, found that the number native plant species, and the cover of native and exotic plants, varied between plots grazed at different times, in some comparisons. Plants: The number of native plant species in pool edges declined more in 2001–2003 in wet-season grazed, compared to continuously or dry-season grazed plots (pool edges: 0.5 fewer species vs 1–1.8 more species). Changes within pools and on the surrounding dry land did not differ between plots with different grazing timings. There was a higher relative cover of native species in pool edges and surrounding dry land in continuously grazed plots, compared to seasonally grazed plots (pool edges: 72% vs 53–58%; dry land: 31% vs 17–18%). There was no difference in relative coverage of native species within pools between grazing timings. There was lower cover of exotic grasses in continuously grazed plots compared to dry- and wet-season grazed plots in dry land but not in other habitats (52% vs 69–84%). Methods: Eighteen plots were established in 2000, each with three pools (70–1,130 m2) and nine times more dry land than pool. Areas were grazed continuously or seasonally (dry-season: October–November; wet-season: April–June). Before the experiment, the area had been grazed for at least 100 years.
A replicated, randomized, controlled study in 1995–1998 in forested pastures in central California, USA, found no difference in plant cover on stream banks or in grassy areas in pastures grazed by cattle in the dry season, compared to the wet season. Plants: There was no difference in plant cover on stream banks or in the surrounding grassy areas between pastures grazed in the dry season, compared to the wet season (31–84%). Methods: Two pastures in each of three streams were assigned to either dry- or wet-season grazing (July–October and October/November–May, respectively). Half of each were grazed at moderate intensity, and half at high intensity (reducing stubble to 2–3 and &lt;2 inches, respectively). Plant cover was measured in June, on 10 transects running across the streams.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Cool Farm Biodiversity
Description: 
