1505: Install ‘primate-proof’ garbage bins
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Because primates have opposable digits, they can easily open garbage bins that are inaccessible to other wildlife species and therefore, garbage bins at tourist sites or other areas that are frequented by both humans and other primates are frequently raided by the latter. The consumption of human food wastes by primates can result in their dependency on the human provided food, their habituation to human contact, increased intra and inter-species aggression, and various health implications arising from artificial food sources causing injury and disease (Orams 2002). This intervention aims to reduce the raiding of garbage bins by primates by designing garbage bins in such a way that their content becomes inaccessible to them (e.g. mounting bins to the ground, adding lids and locks to prevent primates from opening the lids).
            The use of signage to inform people about not being allowed to feed primates is discussed under ‘Put up signs to warn people about not feeding primates’. The implementation and enforcement of ‘no-feeding’ policies is discussed under ‘Implement a ‘no-feeding of wild primates’ policy’. Prohibiting people from consuming food in natural primate habitat is discussed under ‘Do not allow people to consume food within natural areas where primates can view them’.
 
Orams M.B. (2002) Feeding wildlife as a tourism attraction: a review of issues and impacts. Tourism Management, 23, 281–293.

Key Messages:

We found no evidence for the effects of installing ‘primate-proof’ garbage bins on primate populations.

'No evidence' for an action means we have not yet found any studies that directly and quantitatively tested this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Primate Conservation
Description: Primate Synopsis
