2219: Transplant captive-bred or hatchery-reared individuals of habitat-forming (biogenic) species that are resistant to climate change
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Many marine species are vulnerable to climate change (Hoegh-Guldberg & Bruno 2010), but preserving their habitats and promoting biodiversity is thought to help improve the overall resistance of the system and help alleviate the negative effects of climate change.
Transplanting individuals of habitat-forming (biogenic) species (such as kelp, seagrass, mussels, oysters or corals) resistant to climate change can potentially provide a climate-resistant habitat for associated species (van Oppen et al. 2015). These climate-resistant strains or families could be developed for instance through selective breeding or genetic modification (van Oppen et al. 2015). For instance, transplanting individuals of climate-resistant strains of reef-building oysters (Parker et al. 2011) grown in a hatchery may help create an oyster reef that will be resilient to climate change and beneficial to associated subtidal benthic invertebrates.
Evidence related to the transplantation of individuals outside of the context of climate change are summarised under “Habitat restoration and creation – Transplant captive-bred or hatchery-reared habitat-forming (biogenic) species”.
 
Hoegh-Guldberg O. & Bruno J.F. (2010) The impact of climate change on the world’s marine ecosystems. Science, 328, 1523–1528.
Parker L.M., Ross P.M. & O’Connor W.A. (2011) Populations of the Sydney rock oyster, Saccostrea glomerata, vary in response to ocean acidification. Marine Biology, 158,3, 689–697.
van Oppen M.J., Oliver J.K., Putnam H.M. & Gates R.D. (2015) Building coral reef resilience through assisted evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112, 2307–2313.

Key Messages:
     We found no studies that evaluated the effects of transplanting captive-bred or hatchery-reared individuals of habitat-forming/biogenic species that are resistant to climate change on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
