2167: Clean anthropogenic platforms, structures or equipment
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Non-native, invasive and other problematic species can impact on native subtidal benthic invertebrate species through predation, competition for resources (food & space), contamination (for pathogens and diseases), or hybridization (through reproduction) (Molnar et al. 2008; Bishop et al. 2010). Non-native species can become attached to the hard surfaces of anthropogenic structures, such as oil rigs, wind farms, pontoons, or buoys, which then act as “stepping stones” for their introduction into new environments (Adams et al. 2014; Bulleri & Airoldi 2005; Mineur et al. 2012). Regular cleaning of these structures can potentially reduce the risk of introduction to new location, and as such reduce the risk non-native species pose to native subtidal benthic invertebrates.
Evidence related to the cleaning of surfaces is summarised under “Threat: Invasive and other problematic species, genes and diseases – Clean the hull, anchor and chain of commercial and recreational vessels”.
 
Adams T.P., Miller R.G., Aleynik D. & Burrows M.T. (2014) Offshore marine renewable energy devices as stepping stones across biogeographical boundaries. Journal of Applied Ecology, 51, 330–338.
Bulleri F. & Airoldi L. (2005) Artificial marine structures facilitate the spread of a non‐indigenous green alga, Codium fragile ssp. tomentosoides, in the north Adriatic Sea. Journal of Applied Ecology, 42, 1063–1072.
Bishop M.J., Krassoi F.R., McPherson R.G., Brown K.R., Summerhayes S.A., Wilkie E.M. & O’Connor W.A. (2010) Change in wild-oyster assemblages of Port Stephens, NSW, Australia, since commencement of non-native Pacific oyster (Crassostrea gigas) aquaculture. Marine and Freshwater Research, 61, 714–723.
Mineur F., Cook E.J., Minchin D., Bohn K., MacLeod A. & Maggs C.A. (2012) Changing coasts: Marine aliens and artificial structures. Pages 198–243 in: Oceanography and Marine Biology. CRC Press.
Molnar J.L., Gamboa R.L., Revenga C. & Spalding M.D. (2008) Assessing the global threat of invasive species to marine biodiversity. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 6, 485–492.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of cleaning anthropogenic platforms, structures or equipment on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
