1838: Encapsulate planted moss fragments in beads/gel
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Sphagnum fragments can be encapsulated in gel beads or a suspended in a gel slurry (e.g. www.beadamoss.co.uk). The gel keeps the moss fragments moist and provides an initial food source. It may also make sowing easier and cheaper. After spreading, the gel eventually breaks down. Qualitative observations indicate that encapsulated fragments may survive for longer than loose fragments (Hinde et al. 2010). One study in the UK recorded fewer Sphagnum clumps in plots sown with beads than with loose fragments, but this compared different species sown at different densities (Rosenburgh 2015). We captured no direct quantitative comparisons of encapsulated and loose moss performance.
Key peatland types where this action may be appropriate: bogs, fens/fen meadows, tropical peat swamps.
Related actions: spread loose moss fragments, or mixed vegetation fragments, onto peat surface.
Hinde S., Rosenburgh A., Wright N., Buckler M. & Caporn S. (2010) Sphagnum Re-introduction Project: A Report on Research into the Re-introduction of Sphagnum Mosses to a Degraded Moorland. Moors for the Future Research Report 18.
Rosenburgh A. (2015) Restoration and recovery of Sphagnum on degraded blanket bog. PhD Thesis. Manchester Metropolitan University.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of encapsulating moss fragments on their performance, relative to loose moss fragments, when introduced to peatlands.

‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
