3580: Modify number of hooks between floats on longlines 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Using more floats on a longline per hook alters the profile of the longline in the water, which may reduce the opportunities for sea turtles swimming below the surface to become entangled in the line or caught on the hooks.
For studies looking at the effects of different hook designs, see Use circle hooks instead of J-hooks, Use non-offset hooks, Use non-ringed hooks and Use larger hooks.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects of modifying the number of hooks between floats on longlines on reptile populations. This study was in the Atlantic and North Pacific.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (1 STUDY)

Unwanted catch (1 study): One replicated study in the Atlantic and North Pacific found that having fewer hooks between floats did not reduce turtle by-catch in the Pacific but had mixed effects in the Atlantic depending on the species.


Supporting Evidence:
A replicated study in 1992–2015 in pelagic longline fisheries in the Atlantic and North Pacific (Swimmer et al. 2017) found that using fewer hooks between floats on a longline did not reduce turtle by-catch in the Pacific but had mixed effects in the Atlantic depending on the species. All data presented as statistical model results. In the Pacific, by-catch of leatherback Dermochelys coriacea and loggerhead Caretta caretta turtles was not affected by the number of hooks between floats. In the Atlantic, the chance of catching leatherback turtles was lower with fewer hooks between floats, whereas loggerheads were less likely to be caught when there were fewer (&lt;3 hooks) or more (&gt;5 hooks) hooks between floats (see paper for details).  Pelagic Observer Program data from (1992–2015) was used to determine the number of turtles caught/1,000 hooks, and variation in the number of hooks between floats (majority were 3–5 or 4–5 hooks/float) was used to test its effect on bycatch.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
