3295: Disturb soil/sediment surface before planting trees/shrubs: brackish/saline wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
This action involves shallow disturbance of the top few centimetres of soil/sediment (and any vegetation on it), without permanently removing any soil/sediment. Mechanical disturbance could be carried out by tilling, ploughing, disking or scarifying. It may improve survival or growth of planted vegetation. It can clear potentially competing vegetation, and loosen up the soil to allow roots to penetrate more easily.
Related actions: Remove surface soil/sediment before planting; Bury surface soil/sediment before planting, including by deep ploughing.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of disturbing the surface of brackish/saline wetlands before planting trees/shrubs. The study was in Australia.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE
 
VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (1 study): One replicated, controlled study on an estuarine mudflat in Australia found that ploughing the substrate before planting grey mangrove Avicennia marina propagules had no significant effect on their height after two growing seasons.

OTHER

Survival (1 study): One replicated, controlled study on an estuarine mudflat in Australia found that ploughing the substrate before planting grey mangrove propagules had no significant effect on their survival over two growing seasons.


Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, controlled study in 1995–1997 on an estuarine mudflat in New South Wales, Australia (Day et al. 1999) found that ploughing substrate before planting grey mangrove Avicennia marina propagules had no significant effect on their survival or seedling height after two growing seasons. At this time, ploughed and unploughed plots, initially planted with 16 propagules, contained a statistically similar number of seedlings (ploughed: 5.9; not ploughed: 6.7 seedlings/plot) and contained seedlings of statistically similar average height (ploughed: 45 cm; not ploughed: 49 cm). Initial survival rates (after two weeks) were also statistically similar in both treatments (ploughed: 4.7; not ploughed: 5.9 seedlings/plot). Methods: In December 1995, some 1-m2 plots (number not reported) were established in three areas on a tidal mudflat in the Hunter River estuary. The plots were excavated to 20 cm depth then refilled with the local natural substrate (sand/silt/clay). Some of the plots were then ploughed (10–15 cm depth) whilst the others were not ploughed. Sixteen locally collected grey mangrove propagules were planted into each plot. Seedlings were counted in each area after approximately two weeks, then counted and measured in two of the three areas (where some propagules survived) after 15 months.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
