3978: Protect in-field trees 
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Within open farmland, protecting remnant habitat features which provide vertical structure, such as in-field trees or forest fragments, may provide pockets of resources to butterflies and moths. In some cases, this may be enough to support small, transient populations, but it may also provide important stepping stones which allow individuals to move through an otherwise hostile landscape.
For studies on planting new trees, see “Plant in-field trees (e.g. copses)”.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects of protecting in-field trees on butterflies and moths. The study was in Sweden.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in Sweden found that where more trees and trees of more species had been retained in pastures, butterfly species richness was higher, but richness was lower when a high proportion of those trees were large.

POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, site comparison study in 1997 in 20 pastures in the Uppsala region, Sweden (Söderström et al. 2001) found that where more trees and trees of more species had been retained in pastures, butterfly species richness was higher, but richness was lower when a high proportion of those trees were large. There was higher butterfly species richness in pastures with more trees and with more species of tree. However, there was lower species richness when a greater proportion of the trees were large (&gt;30 cm diameter at breast height). All data presented as model results. Butterflies were surveyed along the borders of a 100 m2 square walking transect in 20 grazed semi-natural pastures, repeated 18 times/pasture in July 1997. Tree cover was assessed using maps, aerial photos and field surveys, and tree species and diameter were assessed in the field.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
