2739: Organise vessel monitoring systems
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Marine fisheries throughout the world are often highly regulated and may be subject to many different international or national laws and byelaws. Some however may have no regulation and fishing activity takes place unchecked with unknown consequences to marine fish populations. In response to increased illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing activity towards the end of the 20th century, ways to regulate and monitor fishing vessel activity were established (Dunn et al. 2015). These included catch documentation schemes and international surveillance networks. More recently, electronic vessel monitoring systems, such as satellite, drones or even drifting fish attraction devices (Toonen & Bush 2020) have been developed to track fishing activity. As well as being able to help detect and subsequently prevent illegal fishing activity, monitoring systems may also provide unbiased information on the patterns of fisheries activity on annual and seasonal scales. Such data can be used to inform fisheries management plans to help enhance conservation and biodiversity objectives.
Dunn D.C., Jablonicky C., Crespo G.O., McCauley D.J., Kroodsma D.A., Boerder K., Gjerde K.M. & Halpin P.N. (2018) Empowering high seas governance with satellite vessel tracking data. Fish and Fisheries, 19, 729–739.
Toonen H.M & Bush S.R. (2020) The digital frontiers of fisheries governance: fish attraction devices, drones and satellites. Journal of Environmental Policy and Planning, 22, 125–137.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of organising monitoring systems on marine fish populations. 

‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects. 

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
