3225: Bury surface soil/sediment
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
In degraded marshes or swamps, the surface soil/sediment – and any vegetation on it – could be buried under deeper layers, for instance by deep ploughing. Burial can create bare soil/sediment with spaces for vegetation to grow, prevent undesirable plants from growing from seeds already in the soil, remove excess nutrients that favour growth of undesirable weedy plants, and remove any contaminants or pollutants (Glen et al. 2017). Inverting, rather than removing, the upper soil layer maintains the ground level.
Caution: Heavy machinery is usually needed for this action. Heavy vehicles can churn and compress wetland soils (Campbell et al. 2002).
Related actions: Remove surface soil/sediment without replacement (freshwater marshes – brackish/salt marshes – freshwater swamps – brackish/saline swamps);     Disturb soil/sediment surface (freshwater marshes – brackish/salt marshes – freshwater swamps – brackish/saline swamps);     Bury surface soil/sediment before planting.
Campbell D.A., Cole C.A. & Brooks R.P. (2002) A comparison of created and natural wetlands in Pennsylvania, USA. Wetlands Ecology and Management, 10, 41–49.
Glen E., Price E.A.C., Caporn S.J.M., Carroll J.A., Jones L.M. & Scott R. (2017) Evaluation of topsoil inversion in UK habitat creation and restoration schemes. Restoration Ecology, 25, 72–81.

Key Messages:
We found no studies that evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of burying surface soil/sediment to restore/create marshes or swamps.
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
