2426: Publish data on ranger performance to motivate increased anti-poacher efforts
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Where poaching is a threat to mammals, patrols by rangers may be carried out as a deterrent and to apprehend poachers. Ranger teams may be operating in isolated sites and motivation may be negatively impacted. Publishing metrics on team performances may encourage greater effort with patrolling and pride in ranger team activities and achievements.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects on poaching incidents of publishing data on ranger performance to motivate increased anti-poacher efforts. This study was in Ghana.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Survival (1 study): A replicated, before-and-after, site comparison study in Ghana found that when data were publishing on staff performance, poaching incidents decreased on these sites and on sites from which performance data were not published.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (1 STUDY)

Human behaviour change (1 study): A replicated, before-and-after, site comparison study in Ghana found that publishing data on staff performance lead to an increase in anti-poaching patrols.


Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, before-and-after, site comparison study in 2004–2006 within savanna and forest in seven protected areas and two national parks in Ghana (Jachmann 2008) found that publishing data on staff performance lead to more anti-poaching patrols and that detected of poaching incidents decreased on savanna sites but not on forest sites. Staff performance was 59% higher after reporting (11.8 effective patrol days/staff/month) than before (7.4 effective patrol days/staff/month). In two parks where performance indicators were not reported, performance increased by 11% over this period (after: 10.9; before: 9.8 effective patrol days/staff/month). In four savanna sites, the average number of detected offences related to poaching (including of mammals) was 72% lower after reporting (21 offences/patrol staff-day) than before (74 offences/patrol staff-day). In two forest sites, the average number of offences detected after reporting (179/patrol staff-day) was not significantly different to the number before (214 offences/patrol staff-day). In two parks where performance indicators were not reported, the average number of offences detected after reporting (116 offences/patrol staff-day) was not significantly different to the number before (174 offences/patrol staff-day). Publishing evaluation reports created an awareness of poor performance and generated performance-related competition between sites. Monitoring of patrol effort and illegal activity encounters commenced from mid-2004. Metrics were published at the end of 2005 and monitoring continued through 2006.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
