1729: Implement ‘mosaic management’ of agriculture
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Mosaic management involves managing neighbouring patches of land in different ways. For example, patches of agricultural land could be interspersed with natural vegetation that is never harvested. Sphagnum mosses could be farmed in patches on bogs; reeds farmed in patches of fens; trees producing latex, fruit or medicines farmed in patches of tropical peat swamps (e.g. Giesen 2015). There is some evidence that mosaic farmland management may benefit wildlife such as birds (Dicks et al. 2013).
Note that mosaic management of peatlands is only possible if the farmed areas are kept wet. Draining patches of peatland for agriculture will lower the entire local water table, affecting land beyond the focal agricultural area.
Key peatland types where this action may be appropriate: bogs, fens/fen meadows, tropical peat swamps.
Related action: implement mosaic management when harvesting wild biological resources.
Dicks L.V., Ashpole J.E., Dänhardt J., James K., Jönsson A., Randall N., Showler D.A., Smith R.K., Turpie S., Williams D. & Sutherland W.J. (2013) Farmland Conservation: Evidence for the Effects of Interventions in Northern and Western Europe. Pelagic Publishing, Exeter.
Giesen W. (2015) Utilising non-timber forest products to conserve Indonesia’s peat swamp forests and reduce carbon emissions. Indonesian Journal of Natural History, 3, 10–19.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects, on peatland vegetation, of implementing mosaic management in agricultural systems.

‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
