3970: Mark the location of webs or caterpillars before mowing
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
In productive grasslands, cutting or mowing is used to harvest vegetation, such as for hay or silage, but the process kills or injures the eggs and caterpillars of butterflies and moths living within the grassland (Humbert et al. 2010). However, for conspicuous species, individual caterpillars or their webs can be located and marked prior to mowing so that they can be avoided during the harvest (Błoński 2016), which may increase survival.
Błoński W. (2016) Preliminary assessment of active protection measures of the Marsh Fritillary Euphydryas aurinia (Rottemburg, 1775) habitats in the Świętokrzyski National Park. Naturalia, 5, 132–138.
Humbert J.Y., Ghazoul J., Sauter G.J. & Walter T. (2010) Impact of different meadow mowing techniques on field invertebrates. Journal of Applied Entomology, 134, 592–599.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of marking the location of webs or caterpillars before mowing. This study was in Poland.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
 
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Abundance (1 study): One replicated, before-and-after study in Poland reported that after marsh fritillary caterpillar webs were marked before mowing, the number of webs increased the following year.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
 

Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, before-and-after study in 2015–2016 in four wet meadows in Świętokrzyskie Voivodeship, Poland (Błoński 2016) reported that after marsh fritillary Euphydryas aurinia caterpillar webs were marked prior to mowing, the number of webs increased the following year. Results were not tested for statistical significance. One year after marsh fritillary caterpillar webs were marked prior to mowing there were 17–46 webs/site, compared to 10–20 webs/site the previous year. In 2015, marsh fritillary caterpillar webs in four meadows were marked with flags so that they could be avoided during mowing (at one site trees and shrubs were also removed to restore habitat). In August 2015–2016, marsh fritillary caterpillar webs were surveyed at each site.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
