3904: Use shielded “full cut-off” lights to remove outwards lighting 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Artificial lighting disrupts the activity of nocturnal moths. Although some lighting is necessary for human activity and safety, conventional designs allow light to “spill” outwards from the direction in which the light is required, increasing pollution across a larger area. Changing the design of lights to reduce the amount of light which spills outwards (‘full cut-off’ lighting) may minimize the impact of lights on moths (Gaston et al. 2012).
Gaston K.J., Davies T.W., Bennie J., Hopkins J. (2012) Reducing the ecological consequences of night-time light pollution: options and developments. Journal of Applied Ecology, 49, 1256–1266.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of using shielded “full cut-off” lights to remove outwards lighting. This study was in Slovenia.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Behaviour change (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in Slovenia found that fewer individual moths and moth species were attracted to lights fitted with blinds to prevent light scattering (along with filters to remove shorter wavelengths) than to conventional lights without blinds or filters.


Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, paired, controlled study in 2011–2013 in 15 churches in Slovenia (Verovnik et al. 2015) found that lights with blinds to prevent light scattering, which were also colour-filtered, attracted fewer individuals and species of moths than conventional lighting. On church walls illuminated with yellow or blue light with blinds, both the abundance (12–20 individuals/year) and species richness of moths (10–15 species/year) were lower than on walls illuminated with conventional lighting and no blinds (abundance: 73 individuals/year; richness: 42 species/year). Fifteen churches in dark, rural areas were grouped into adjacent triplets, and illuminated in one of three ways: blue or yellow metal halide lamps, or the existing light (metal halide or sodium vapour, 70–400 W). Experimental lamps were 70 or 150 W, had custom-made filters to remove wavelengths shorter than 400 nm (blue) or 470 nm (yellow), and blinds to prevent the scattering of light away from the building. The illumination used on each church was rotated within each triplet each year. From May–September 2011–2013, moths were counted for 45 minutes six times/year within a 10 × 3 m area of wall on each church. Churches within a triplet were surveyed on the same night.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
