2445: Deter predation of livestock by herding livestock using adults instead of children to reduce human-wildlife conflict
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Domestic livestock may be vulnerable to mammalian predators. Livestock may be guarded by people to deter predators. In some areas, guarding is routinely carried out by children. This intervention refers to guarding by adults instead of children.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects on predatory mammal activities of herding livestock using adults instead of children to reduce human-wildlife conflict. This study was in Cameroon.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (1 STUDY)

Human-wildlife conflict (1 study): A site comparison study in Cameroon found that using adults to herd livestock reduced losses through predation relative to that of livestock herded solely by children.


Supporting Evidence:
A site comparison study in 2008 of savanna around a national park in Cameroon (Tumenta et al. 2013) found that using adults to herd livestock reduced losses through predation relative to livestock herded by children. Among resident pastoralist households, fewer livestock were lost to carnivores when the livestock were herded by adults (two animals/year) than by children (eight animals/year). Among nomadic pastoralist households, there were also fewer livestock lost to carnivores when herded by adults (five animals/year) than by children (16 animals/year). Among resident pastoralists that herded livestock, 42% of herders (60 herders) were adults. Among nomadic pastoralists that herded livestock, 72% (124 herders) were adults. Two hundred and seven resident pastoralists and 174 nomadic pastoralists were interviewed. Pastoralists reported the incidence of predation of livestock by large carnivores and details of animal husbandry techniques used. Villages studied were selected based on tracked movements of radio-collared lions.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
