1532: Control habitat-altering mammals (e.g. elephants) through exclusion (e.g. fences) or translocation
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
This intervention involves excluding mammals that alter the habitat in such a way that it may negatively affect primate populations. For example, elephants may destroy large numbers of trees when they occur at very high densities (e.g. Laws 1970). If, for example, the destruction of trees by elephants resulted in food shortages for resident primate population, then this intervention may indirectly benefit primates that depend on these plants for food through allowing the habitat to recover, once the elephants are removed.  This is an invasive intervention and its usefulness should be carefully considered from an ethical perspective before implementing it.
            Controlling predation by non-primate species is discussed under ‘Reduce primate predation by non-primate species through exclusion (e.g. fences) or translocation’, controlling predation by other primate species is discussed under ‘Reduce primate predation by other primate species through exclusion (e.g. fences) or translocation’, and controlling competition for food with other species is discussed under ’Control inter-specific competition for food through exclusion (e.g. fences) or translocation’.
 
Laws R.M. (1970) Elephants as agents of habitat and landscape change in East Africa. Oikos, 21, 1–15.

Key Messages:

We found no evidence for the effects of controlling habitat-altering mammals through exclusion or translocation on primate populations.

'No evidence' for an action means we have not yet found any studies that directly and quantitatively tested this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Primate Conservation
Description: Primate Synopsis
