1507: Put up signs to warn people about not feeding primates 
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
The consumption of human food wastes or the feeding by tourists of primates can result in their dependency on the human provided food, their habituation to human contact, increased intra and inter-species aggression, and various health implications arising from artificial food sources causing injury and disease (Orams 2002). This intervention aims to reduce the negative impact of consumption of human food wastes by primates, by installing signage to warn people about not feeding primates.
            The implementation and enforcement of ‘no-feeding’ policies is discussed under ‘Implement a ‘no-feeding of wild primates’ policy’. The use of garbage bins inaccessible to primates is discussed under ‘Install ‘primate-proof’ garbage bins’. Prohibiting people from consuming food in natural primate habitat is discussed under ‘Do not allow people to consume food within natural areas where primates can view them’.
 
Orams M.B. (2002) Feeding wildlife as a tourism attraction: a review of issues and impacts. Tourism Management, 23, 281–293.

Key Messages:

One review in Japan found that aggressive interactions between Japanese macaques and humans declined after prohibiting tourists from feeding of monkeys.


Supporting Evidence:
A review in 2010 at multiple sites in Japan found that aggressive interractions between free-ranging Japanese macaques Macaca fuscata and humans decreased after food provision by tourists was prohibited and the message was clearly transmitted. After decades of primate feeding by tourists, the practice was banned and the number of aggressive incidents of macaques on people decreased at multiple sites as well as the macaque road collisions at sites where tourists used to feed monkeys from the cars (no data included). The distance to tourists also increased after the ban (no data provided). No statistical tests were carried out to determine whether these differences were significant. The shop used by tourists to buy food for macaques at Takasakiyama Nature Zoo was closed in 1993 and the feeding of primates was prohibited and advertised using signs and direct advice by rangers during educational talks. In 1952-1972 food provisioning took place at 41 free-ranging monkey parks to attract tourists and reduce crop damage but resulted in rapidly increasing populations, crop and forest damage and the need to control macaques. Food provisioning by tourists was prohibited in the 1990s.  


Synopsis Details:
Title: Primate Conservation
Description: Primate Synopsis
