3316: Add cover other than mulch before/after planting non-woody plants: freshwater wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Planted vegetation may be damaged by hot, dry and bright conditions on bare wetland surfaces. Covers such as plastic mesh, sheets, or shelters for individual plants could ameliorate these factors and help planted vegetation to establish. The precise effect of covers may vary depending on the material used and how it is applied (e.g. to a large area vs individual plants; on the wetland surface vs suspended above the surface).
Related actions: Add cover other than mulch, other than to complement planting; Add surface mulch to complement planting; Use fences or barriers to protect planted areas from physical damage, e.g. with tree guards or breakwaters.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of adding cover other than mulch to freshwater wetlands planted with emergent, non-woody plants. The study was in Australia.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Tree/shrub abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in floodplain swamps in Australia found that covering plots with plastic or jute mats before planting native understory herbs increased their overall cover, one year later.
Individual species abundance (1 study): The same study found that covering plots with plastic or jute mats before planting native understory herbs reduced the cover of two problematic herb species, one year later.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in 2014–2015 in a degraded floodplain swamp in Victoria, Australia (Greet et al. 2016) found that covering plots with plastic or jute matting before planting native understory herbs increased their cover. One year after planting, plots with mats had higher cover of native understory herbs (18–33%) than plots without mats (2–4%). Plots with mats also had lower cover of problematic reed canarygrass Phalaris arundinacea and common reed Phragmites australis (4–28%) than plots without mats (73–99%). Methods: In February–March 2014, six 100-m2 plots were established in each of two floodplain wetlands. All plots had been recently cut and sprayed with herbicide (to control reed canarygrass or common reed) and fenced to exclude large animals. Four plots (two random plots/site) received each cover treatment: plastic weed matting, jute matting, or no matting. All plots were then planted with native understory herbs (3 plants/m2; species not reported), plus shrubs (1 plant/m2) and tree seedlings (1 plant/2 m2). Holes were cut in the matting to allow planting. Vegetation was surveyed in March 2015, in five 1-m2 quadrats/plot.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
