2316: (CFT) Predatory invertebrates: Cut, mow and/or graze to maintain early succession (22e, 29e)
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:


Key Messages:
Invertebrates (3 studies): Two replicated studies (one controlled, one site comparison) in grasslands in the USA and Spain found more invertebrates in sheep-, goat-, or cattle-grazed plots, compared to ungrazed plots, in some or all comparisons. One before-and-after study in grassland in the USA found that a threatened, endemic butterfly species did not recolonize a site after grazing was reintroduced. One replicated site comparison in forested grasslands in Spain found higher beetle diversity in grazed plots, compared to ungrazed plots, in one of two beetle groups. Two replicated studies (one randomized and controlled) in grasslands in the USA and Spain found different invertebrate communities in grazed and ungrazed plots.

Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, controlled study in 1997–2006 in scrub and grassland in central California, USA, found more ground-dwelling invertebrates in cattle-grazed plots, compared to ungrazed plots.  Invertebrates: Fewer ground-dwelling invertebrates were found in grazed plots, compared to ungrazed plots, in six of nine years (data not provided). Abundances of grasshoppers did not differ between grazed and ungrazed plots (8–1,600 individuals/count). Methods: Four 2.6 km2 plots were established and grazed from December to leave approximately 560 kg dry matter/ha by April. Therefore, grazing intensity varied over time, and plots were not grazed at all in 2002–2004. Within each plot, a 25 ha plot was left ungrazed. Mammals were surveyed using 64 traps in each plot for six days and six nights in July–September each year. Grasshoppers and day-active lizards were surveyed visually within 9 ha grids, on ten days in May–July each year. Ground-dwelling invertebrates were monitored with pitfall traps. Vegetation was monitored on the same grids as lizards and clipped to assess biomass.
A replicated site comparison in 2007 in montane forested pastures in northwest Spain found more ground beetles, and a higher diversity of ground beetles, in goat-grazed or sheep-grazed pastures, compared to ungrazed pastures. Invertebrates: Beetle diversity was higher in grazed pastures, compared to ungrazed pastures, in one of two groups (ground beetles, but not rove beetles: data reported as effective number of species). More ground beetles were found in grazed pastures, compared to ungrazed pastures (19–510 vs 9–220 individuals), but similar numbers of rove beetles were found (56–240). Similar communities of ground beetles, but different communities of rove beetles, were found in grazed and ungrazed sites (data reported as statistical results). Methods: In 2007, three grazed sites and three abandoned sites were selected (abandoned at least 20 years previously). Invertebrates were collected in June–October (10 pitfall traps/site).
A replicated, randomized, controlled study in 2008–2009 in pastures in northern California, USA, found fewer arthropods in plots with simulated grazing, compared to ungrazed plots. Invertebrates: Similar numbers of arthropod species were found in plots with or without simulated grazing (data not reported). Overall, fewer arthropods were found in plots with simulated grazing (data not reported). More herbivorous arthropods were found in plots with simulated grazing (79% higher volume), but more predatory arthropods were found in ungrazed plots (13% higher in ungrazed plots). Similar numbers of parasitoids or decomposers were found in plots with or without simulated grazing (data reported as log volumes). Methods: In 2006, two tilled plots were planted with native bunchgrass species, and two tilled plots were sown with non-native annual grasses. In 2008–2009, simulated heavy grazing (30–45 minutes of disturbance by 40–42 cattle each spring/summer, and mowing the plots to 2 cm height, 2–3 times) was used on some sections of the plots (each 3 x 10 m). Arthropods and plants were sampled in May 2009 (suction sampling and visual surveys, respectively).


Synopsis Details:
Title: Cool Farm Biodiversity
Description: 
