2198: Regulate the use, dosage and disposal of agrichemicals
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Agrichemicals (or agrochemicals) are chemicals used in agriculture, such as pesticides, fertilisers and manure. They are designed to have long-lasting effects on living organisms, are often toxic to non-target species, and as such are considered a major source of pollution and toxicity in aquatic environments (Islam & Tanaka 2004; Rawlings et al. 1998). Agrichemicals can reach the marine environment through soil erosion, rivers, and other watercourse runoffs. There, they can accumulate in the seabed sediment and affect subtidal benthic invertebrates through the introduction of excess nutrients and toxic substances (Islam & Tanaka 2004). The use, dosage and disposal of agrichemicals can potentially be regulated with the aim of reducing their environmental impacts. This would likely limit or reduce the amount that enters the marine environment and reduce the risks to subtidal benthic invertebrates associated with this pollution.
Evidence for other interventions related to pollution from agriculture are summarised under “Threat: Pollution – Treat wastewater from intensive livestock holdings”, “Establish aquaculture to extract the nutrients from run-offs” and “Create artificial wetlands to reduce the amount of pollutants reaching the sea”.
 
Islam S. & Tanaka M. (2004) Impacts of pollution on coastal and marine ecosystems including coastal and marine fisheries and approach for management: a review and synthesis. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 48, 624–649.
Rawlins B.G., Ferguson A.J., Chilton P.J., Arthurton R.S., Rees J.G. & Baldock J.W. (1998) Review of agricultural pollution in the Caribbean with particular emphasis on small island developing states. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 36, 658–668.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of regulating the use, dosage and disposal of agrichemicals on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
