2689: Use a different method to sort or bring catch onboard
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
The process of fish being lifted out of the water in fishing nets and on to a vessel for sorting can create extreme stress (Ashley 2006). In trawl nets there is also an increased likelihood of crush or puncture injuries under the weight of the catch. In addition, depending on the duration of time exposed during the catch sorting process , fish survival is decreased, not only due to factors such as oxygen deprivation, but also to the drying out of the fishes’ protective layer. Using different methods to move and sort fish (e.g. using water) may help improve the survival of discarded fish that after sorting are returned to the sea, by minimising air exposure and overall damage, including disruption to their mucus layer and scales (Hürlimann et al. 2014). One potential sorting method to reduce discard mortality, using a water-filled sorting tray instead of a conventional dry tray, led to fewer deaths of discarded fish during longer sorting times (Broadhurst et al. 2008).
For related interventions, see ‘Handling of catch’.
Ashley P.J. (2007) Fish welfare: current issues in aquaculture. Applied Animal Behaviour Science, 104, 199–235.
Broadhurst M.K., Uhlmann S.S. & Millar R.B. (2008) Reducing discard mortality in an estuarine trawl fishery. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology & Ecology, 364, 54–61.
Hürlimann R., Laan R., Vissia S., Willemsma A. & Zagenia F. (2014) Welfare of wild caught plaice (Pleuronectes platessa) An inventory how current practices in fisheries may affect welfare of plaice and possible indicators thereof. MSc thesis. Wageningen University, Netherlands.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of using different methods to sort or bring catches onboard vessels on marine fish populations. 

‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
