2218: Transplant/release climate change-resistant captive-bred or hatchery-reared individuals to re-establish or boost native populations
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:


Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of transplanting/releasing mate change-resistant captive-bred or hatchery-reared individuals on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Supporting Evidence:
Many marine species are vulnerable to climate change (Hoegh-Guldberg & Bruno 2010), but certain genetic strains or family lines within species can be more resistant and robust to the effects of climate change than others. Climate-resistant strains or families of certain species could be developed, for instance through selective breeding or genetic modification (van Oppen et al. 2015). For instance, selectively-bred family lines of the Sydney rock oyster Saccostrea glomerata have been shown to be more resilient to ocean acidification than the wild populations of Sydney rock oyster (not selectively-bred) (Parker et al. 2011). Transplanting or releasing climate change-resistant captive-bred or hatchery-reared species, for instance following the selection of a particular genetic strain or family-line, may potentially help re-establish or boost native populations by adding resistant individuals into the population and improving its genetic diversity (Bernhardt & Leslie 2013).Evidence related to the transplantation of individuals outside of the context of climate change are summarised under “Species management – Transplant/release captive-bred or hatchery-reared species”. Bernhardt J.R. & Leslie H.M. (2013) Resilience to climate change in coastal marine ecosystems. Annual Review of Marine Science, 5, 371–392.Hoegh-Guldberg O. & Bruno J.F. (2010) The impact of climate change on the world’s marine ecosystems. Science, 328, 1523–1528.Parker L.M., Ross P.M. & O’Connor W.A. (2011) Populations of the Sydney rock oyster, Saccostrea glomerata, vary in response to ocean acidification. Marine Biology, 158,3, 689–697.van Oppen M.J., Oliver J.K., Putnam H.M. & Gates R.D. (2015) Building coral reef resilience through assisted evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112, 2307–2313.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
