2290: Scrubland plants: Cut, mow and/or graze to maintain early succession (suppress shrub)
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:


Key Messages:

Abundance (14 studies): Eight studies (two meta-analyses; two replicated, randomized, and controlled) from grasslands, shrublands, and forests in the USA, Spain, and France found higher cover or higher abundance of some groups of plants (or lower cover of undesirable plants), on cattle-, sheep-, or goat-grazed plots, compared to ungrazed plots. Six studies (five replicated; one randomized and controlled) from grasslands in Spain and the USA found lower cover or lower abundance of some groups of plants on cattle-, sheep-, or goat-grazed plots, compared to ungrazed plots (or after grazers were reintroduced). Three replicated, controlled studies (two randomized) from grasslands in the USA found similar cover or biomass on grazed or ungrazed plots.
Diversity (7 studies): Three studies (one meta-analysis; two replicated site comparisons) from grasslands in the USA found more plant species on grazed plots, compared to ungrazed plots, in some or all comparisons. One of these studies also found fewer species of some plant groups on grazed plots, and two of these stuides also found more non-native species on grazed plots, compared to ungrazed plots. Two replicated, controlled studies (one randomized) in grasslands in the USA and France found no difference in the number of plant species between cattle- or sheep-grazed plots and ungrazed plots. Two replicated controlled studies (one randomized) from grasslands in the USA and France found no difference in plant diversity between cattle- or sheep-grazed plots and ungrazed plots. One replicated, randomized, controlled study grasslands and woodlands in the USA found that plant community composition varied between cattle-grazed and ungrazed plots.
Survival (3 studies): Of two studies on purple needlegrass mortality from grasslands in the USA, one replicated, randomized, controlled study found lower mortality on sheep-grazed plots, compared to ungrazed plots, in some comparisons, but found higher mortality in other comparisons, and one replicated, controlled study found no difference in mortality between cattle-grazed plots and ungrazed plots. One replicated, randomized, controlled study from grasslands in the USA found lower germination rates in purple needlegrass seeds from sheep-grazed plots, compared to ungrazed plots, in some comparisons.


Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, controlled study in 2010–2013 in grasslands in southern France found that grazing by sheep had little effect on plant communities or elmleaf blackberry Rubus ulmifolius. Plants: Similar numbers of plant species and similar plant diversity were found in grazed and ungrazed plots (17–51 species; diversity reported as Shannon indices). Bramble cover was lower in grazed plots, compared to ungrazed plots, under one of four conditions, when plots were also cut and drained (25% vs 49% cover). Bramble height was lower in grazed plots, under two of four conditions, when plots were also cut (13–14 vs 35–38 cm). Vegetation height was lower in grazed plots, under one of four conditions, when they were also cut and drained (13 vs 36 cm). Methods: In 2010, 48 plots (10 x 10 m) were established in two areas of grassland grazed by sheep and goats. Half of the plots were fenced to prevent grazing. Half of the plots were also cut, and half were drained using drainage ditches. The grazers were a flock of 1,100 sheep and 20 goats, for 30 days in March–April and 15 days in May–June in 2011–2013 (2.7 days/sheep/ha/year). Vegetation was monitored in May (one 5 x 5 m quadrat/plot).
A meta-analysis from 2015 of four studies from annual rangelands in California, USA, found that grazing decreased the abundance of medusahead Taeniatherum caput-medusae. Plants: The abundance of medusahead was lower in plots that were grazed, compared to ungrazed, one year after grazing (reported as the response ratio of grazed to ungrazed plots: –0.7 log response ratio), but not 2–4 years after grazing. Methods: The Web of Knowledge, Agricola, and Digital Dissertations databases (and others managed by the University of California) were searched for publications from 1960 to 2013 (keywords not reported). Five studies from 1969 to 2011 were meta-analysed. There were four studies from California (response ratios from –2.4 to 0.4) and one study from Oregon (response ratios from 0.17 to 0.48: all positive, and so grazing decreased the abundance of medusahead only in California). Sheep or cattle were used for grazing, for 5–180 days, with an average stocking rate of 5.6 animal unit months (AUMs). The average plot size was 0.21 ha.


Synopsis Details:
Title: All biodiversity
Description: 
