2828: Use ‘mammal-safe’ nets to capture and release mammals trapped in fishing structures
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Marine and freshwater mammals may enter fixed fishing structures, such as herring weirs, and become trapped. This intervention involves the use of specially designed nets, e.g. made with buoyant materials and a larger mesh size, to capture and release mammals instead of conventional fishing nets. This may reduce the risk of injury or death during release.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects on marine mammals of using ‘mammal-safe’ nets to capture and release mammals trapped in fishing structures. The study was in the Bay of Fundy (Canada).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Survival (1 study): One controlled study in the Bay of Fundy found that using ‘marine mammal nets’ with a larger mesh size to release harbour porpoises from herring weirs resulted in lower porpoise mortality compared to using conventional herring nets.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Supporting Evidence:
A controlled study in 1992–2001 at coastal fishing sites in the Bay of Fundy, Canada (Neimanis et al. 2004) found that using specialised ‘marine mammal nets’ with a large mesh size to release harbour porpoises Phocoena phocoena from herring weirs resulted in lower porpoise mortality compared to when conventional nets were used. Overall porpoise mortality rates were lower when released from weirs with ‘marine mammal nets’ (6 of 240 porpoises, 3%) than with conventional herring nets (44 of 239 porpoises, 18%). Porpoises trapped in herring weirs were captured and released using two types of purse-seine net: ‘marine mammal nets’ (buoyant polypropylene with mesh size 7.5 cm; 240 porpoises) and conventional herring nets (mesh size 0.75–1.25 cm; 239 porpoises). Herring weirs (comprising 1-cm nylon mesh strung between wooden stakes in a kidney-shape, 3–20 m deep) were built near the shore to catch Atlantic herring Clupea harengus. Trapped porpoises were enclosed within the purse-seine nets, transferred to boats and released outside of the weirs. Researchers recorded porpoise deaths during each of the 479 release attempts in 1992–2001.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
