3693: Protect nests and nesting sites from predation by creating new nesting sites
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
When suitable nesting habitat is limited, reptiles may nest at relatively high densities, and clusters of nests are more vulnerable to predation (Marchand & Litvaitis 2003). Increasing the available nesting habitat may reduce predation.
For other studies that discuss the effects of creating new nesting sites see Habitat restoration and creation.
Marchand M.N. & Litvaitis J.A. (2003) Effects of landscape composition, habitat features, and nest distribution on predation rates of simulated turtle nests. Biological Conservation, 117, 243–251.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects of protecting nests and nesting sites from predation by creating new nesting sites on reptile populations. This study was in Spain.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Reproductive success (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Spain found that predation rate of artificial Hermann’s tortoise nests in newly created nesting sites was similar to the predation rate in natural nesting sites.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, controlled study in 2009 in open shrubland in Catalonia, Spain (Vilardell et al. 2012) found that clearing shrubs to create new nesting sites did not reduce predation of artificial western Hermann’s tortoise Testudo hermanni hermanni nests. In trials with high densities of artificial nests, predation rates of artificial Hermann’s tortoise nests in new nesting sites created by clearing shrubland (44% nests predated after 48 hours and 100% predated after 144 hours) were statistically similar to predation rates in existing natural nesting sites (100% nests predated after 48 hours). In second and third trials with lower densities of artificial nests, all nests in new nesting sites and natural nesting sites were depredated within 48 hours. Predation of artificial tortoise nests (three buried quail Corturnix coturnix eggs) was monitored in 36 square plots (of 4, 25 and 100m2, numbers of each sized plot not provided) in a nature reserve. In 27 plots, shrubs were cut to 0–3% ground cover to represent new nesting areas (see original paper for details) and nine plots in a natural tortoise nesting area were not managed. In May 2009, nine artificial nests were placed in the centre of each managed and unmanaged plot and, in the 25 and 100 m plots, an additional nine artificial nests were placed in one corner of each plot (total 486 artificial nests). Nests were visited every two days for one week and weekly for up to a month. Predation was monitored by trail cameras and visual signs. The trial was repeated in June and August 2009, but with only one artificial nest in the centre and, where appropriate, corner of each plot.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
