1979: Replace culling of bats with non-lethal methods of preventing vampire bats from spreading rabies to humans
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Vampire bats have been extensively culled in Latin America to prevent the spread of rabies to humans. However, research shows that culling is ineffective and may increase the spread of rabies (e.g. Streicker et al. 2012). Non-lethal measures of disease control have been suggested as alternatives, such as vaccinating humans against rabies, placing netting over doorways in dwellings, and avoiding sudden removal of established livestock from villages (e.g. Stoner-Duncan et al. 2014).
For an intervention relating to the spread of rabies to livestock, see ‘Replace culling of bats with non-lethal methods of preventing vampire bats from spreading rabies to livestock’.
Stoner-Duncan B., Streicker D.G. & Tedeschi C.M. (2014) Vampire bats and rabies: toward an ecological solution to a public health problem. PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases, 8, e2867.
Streicker D.G., Recuenco S., Valderrama W., Gomez Benavides J., Vargas I., Pacheco V., Condori Condori R.E., Montgomery J., Rupprecht C. E., Rohani P. & Altizer S. (2012) Ecological and anthropogenic drivers of rabies exposure in vampire bats: implications for transmission and control. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 279, 3384–3392.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of replacing culling of bats with non-lethal methods of preventing vampire bats from spreading rabies to humans on vampire bat populations.

‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Bat Conservation
Description: Update 2020
