1568: Parrot’s feather: Mechanical harvesting and cutting
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Mechanical control methods are widely used to control non-native and native weeds. Harvesting and cutting could be used to remove or reduce biomass of parrot’s feather from affected waterbodies. Although the method is relatively cheap compared to other control options it is not species-specific and therefore may impact non-target taxa (Hussner et al. 2017). Due to its capacity to reproduce through vegetative propagation (CABI 2017), the use of this technique may be problematic for the control of parrot’s feather as any fragments that remain may form new stands of vegetation. The use of manual harvesting to control parrot’s feather is discussed in ‘Manual harvesting (hand-weeding)’. The intervention ‘Mechanical excavation’ discusses the mechanical digging to control parrot’s feather and the use of water-jet ventilation and suction dredging are respectively discussed in ‘Removal using water jets’ and ‘Suction dredging and diver-assisted suction removal’.
 
CABI (2017) Myriophyllum aquaticum. In: Invasive Species Compendium. Wallingford, UK: CAB International. Available at http://www.cabi.org/isc/datasheet/34939 Accessed 2 October 2017.
Hussner A., Stiers I., Verhofstad M.J.J.M., Bakker E.S., Grutters B.M.C., Haury J., van Valkenburg J.L.C.H., Brundu G., Newman J., Clayton J.S. & Anderson L.W.J. (2017) Management and control methods of invasive alien freshwater aquatic plants: A review. Aquatic Botany, 136, 112-137.

Key Messages:

We found no evidence on the use of manual harvesting to control parrot’s feather.

'No evidence' for an action means we have not yet found any studies that directly and quantitatively tested this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species
Description: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species Synopsis
