3233: Add sediment: brackish/saline swamps
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Adding small amounts of sediment to swamps is a possible action to counter multiple threats. These include: sea level rise; subsidence (e.g. following oil and gas extraction); reduced sediment inputs following the construction of levees, flood control structures or jetties; and erosion from storms or boat traffic or following excessive grazing (Reed & Wilson 2004). Adding sediment can physically raise the ground surface and provide nutrients to vegetation. In turn, vegetation can physically protect and stabilize wetlands, and encourage further sediment deposition. Sediment or sediment slurry could be added directly to a focal site, or placed nearby then transported to the focal site by natural process (Foster 2013).
Factors that might influence the effects of this action include the amount of sediment added, and whether any vegetation is present before sediment addition.
Related actions: Deposit soil/sediment to form physical habitat structure; Transplant or replace wetland soil in order to introduce swamp vegetation.
Foster N.M., Hudson M.D., Bray S. & Nicholls R.J. (2013) Intertidal mudflat and saltmarsh conservation and sustainable use in the UK: a review. Journal of Environmental Management, 126, 96–104.
Reed D.J. & Wilson L. (2004) Coast 2050: a new approach to restoration of Louisiana coastal wetlands. Physical Geography, 25, 4–21.

Key Messages:
We found no studies that evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of adding sediment to existing brackish/saline swamps.
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
