3275: Lower water level (before/after planting)
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
If wetlands are flooded too deeply, or soils are waterlogged for too long, desirable marsh or swamp vegetation may not be able to survive. To complement planting efforts, the water level/table could be lowered by actions such as removing dams downstream, switching off water input pumps, and improving drainage by digging shallow “runnels” or deeper creeks (Wigand et al. 2017).
The summarized evidence does not include general guidance about plant species’ moisture preferences, or laboratory studies of performance under different levels of soil moisture. To be summarized as evidence for this action, studies must have experimentally tested the effect of raising the water level to complement planting in the field.
Related actions: Lower water level to restore degraded habitats (freshwater marshes – brackish/salt marshes – freshwater swamps – brackish/saline swamps);     Lower water level to restore/create habitats from other land uses (freshwater marshes – brackish/salt marshes – freshwater swamps – brackish/saline swamps);     Actively manage water level after planting (freshwater non-woody – brackish/saline non-woody – freshwater trees/shrubs – brackish/saline trees/shrubs);     Reprofile/relandscape before planting.
Wigand C., Ardito T., Chaffee C., Ferguson W., Paton S., Raposa K., Vandemoer C. & Watson E. (2017) A climate change adaptation strategy for management of coastal marsh systems. Estuaries and Coasts, 40, 682–693.

Key Messages:
We found no studies that evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of lowering the water level in areas planted with emergent marsh/swamp plants.
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
