2832: Enforce legislation to control illegal fishing using gear or methods that are harmful to mammals
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Legislation has been put in place in some countries to prohibit or restrict the use of certain types of fishing gear or methods that are harmful to marine and freshwater mammals. However, illegal fishing activities may still occur (e.g. Tudela et al. 2005). This intervention involves enforcing existing legislation to reduce illegal fishing with gear types or methods that are harmful to mammals. This may involve measures such as deploying patrol boats, introducing vessel monitoring procedures (such as onboard human observers or CCTV), establishing stricter port controls, reporting of fishing effort, and issuing fines and penalties for non-compliance. Local communities may also be involved, e.g. by reporting illegal fishing activities (Butler et al. 2017).
Butler J.R.A., McKelvey S.A., McMyn I.A.G. & Leyshon B. (2017) Does community surveillance mitigate by-catch risk to coastal cetaceans? Insights from salmon poaching and bottlenose dolphins in Scotland. Fisheries and Oceanography, 3, 555603.
Tudela S., Kai Kai A., Maynou F., El Andalossi M. & Guglielmi P. (2005) Driftnet fishing and biodiversity conservation: the case study of the large-scale Moroccan driftnet fleet operating in the Alboran Sea (SW Mediterranean). Biological Conservation, 121, 65–78.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of enforcing legislation to control illegal fishing using gear or methods that are harmful to mammals on marine and freshwater mammal populations.

‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
