2152: Limit, cease or prohibit access for recreational purposes
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
 
Recreational activities can impact subtidal benthic invertebrates through species or habitat removal, physical damage, disturbance (Milazzo et al. 2002) or pollution (Harriott et al. 1997). Boat and other forms of access for recreational purposes could be limited, by restricting access in space and time (duration and occurrence). Permanent or temporary closure could be put in place, or access prohibited through bylaws. Stopping or restricting the access for recreational purposes may help reduce the intensity of the threats associated with boating and recreational activities, such as harvesting, angling, or diving, and potentially allow subtidal benthic invertebrate communities to persist or recover over time.
When restrictions of recreational activities occur in the context of a marine protected area, evidence is summarised under “Habitat protection”, including “Habitat protection - Designate a Marine Protected Area and set a no-anchoring zone”, “Designate a Marine Protected Area and prohibit the harvest of scallops”, “Designate a Marine Protected Area and prohibit the harvest of conch” and “Designate a Marine Protected Area and prohibit the harvest of sea urchins”.
 
Harriott V.J., Davis D. & Banks S.A. (1997) Recreational diving and its impact in marine protected areas in eastern Australia. Ambio, 173–179.
Milazzo M., Chemello R., Badalamenti F., Camarda R. & Riggio S. (2002) The Impact of Human Recreational Activities in Marine Protected Areas: What Lessons Should Be Learnt in the Mediterranean Sea? Marine Ecology, 23, 280–290.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of limiting, ceasing or prohibiting access for recreational purposes on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
