3220: Create mounds or hollows: brackish/saline swamps
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
This action involves creating discrete mounds (e.g. by adding blocks of soil, bundles of sticks, other coarse woody debris) or hollows (e.g. by excavation) to provide suitable conditions for emergent wetland vegetation. The scale of this action falls somewhere between reprofiling/relandscaping (large-scale landscape features, tens of metres wide) and disturbing the soil/sediment surface (which may create small scale mounds or hollows, millimetres or a few centimetres wide/deep).
Often, this action aims to mimic the natural microtopography of swamps, which can be created by sediment accumulation, erosion, tree fall, root growth or animal activity (Vivian-Smith 1997, Bruland & Richardson 2005). Microtopography can increase plant diversity, because the different microclimates or microelevations may support different species (Vivian-Smith 1997). Depressions might provide sheltered and moist microclimates, in which the first colonizing plants can become established. Large woody debris will release nutrients as it decomposes.
Studies that simply compare vegetation on mounds vs hollows (e.g. Bruland & Richardson 2005) have not been summarized as evidence here, even if those mounds and hollows were deliberately created.
Related actions: Reprofile/relandscape larger areas; Disturb soil/sediment surface without creating discrete mounds and/or hollows; Create mounds or hollows before planting.          
Bruland G.L. & Richardson C.J. (2005) Hydrologic, edaphic, and vegetative responses to microtopographic reestablishment in a restored wetland. Restoration Ecology, 13, 515–523.
Vivian-Smith G. (1997) Microtopographic heterogeneity and floristic diversity in experimental wetland communities. Journal of Ecology, 85, 71–82.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of creating mounds or hollows in brackish/saline swamps. The study was in Indonesia.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Tree/shrub abundance (1 study): One study in Indonesia simply reported the number of mangrove tree seedlings that had colonized a pile of branches placed in a disused aquaculture pond, around seven months after depositing the branches (and releasing mangrove propagules).

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Supporting Evidence:
A study in 2013–2014 in a disused aquaculture pond in South Sulawesi, Indonesia (Oh et al. 2017) reported that approximately seven months after depositing a mound of branches (and releasing mangrove propagules), the mound had been colonized by 29 mangrove tree seedlings. Methods: In November 2013, a 770-m2 pile of branches was added to a disused aquaculture pond to create a raised mound (extending above the range of elevations colonized by mangroves in other ponds). Walls within the wider pond system were breached to improve tidal exchange. In December 2013, &gt;218,000 propagules (of &gt;7 species) were added to the ponds at high tide. Seedlings growing in the pile of branches were counted in June 2014.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
