2325: Use signs or access restrictions to reduce disturbance to mammals
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Access to areas by people can cause disturbance to some mammals. This may cause them to alter behaviour, including through reducing their use of such areas. To limit this disturbance, access may be restricted, including through using signage or physical barriers.
See also: Exclude or limit number of visitors to reserves or protected areas.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects of using signs or access restrictions to reduce disturbance to mammals. This study was in the USA.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Use (1 study): A replicated, paired sites, site comparison study in the USA found that removing or closing roads increased use of those areas by black bears.


Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, paired sites, site comparison study in 2006–2009 of a forest in Idaho, USA (Switalski & Nelson 2011) found that removing or closing roads increased use of those areas by black bears Ursus americanus. More bears were detected on former roads that had been removed (4.6 detections/100 camera-trap days) than on paired open roads (0.3). Similarly, there were more on closed than on paired open roads when roads were closed by a barrier (closed: 1.5; open: 0.6 detections/100 camera-trap days) or by a gate (closed: 0.5; open: 0 detections/100 camera-trap days). Eighteen closed roads were paired with open roads. Closed roads included seven removed by reprofiling in the previous 10 years, five closed by barriers and six that were gated. Closed roads were sampled by camera-trapping 1.6 km along from their intersection with the paired open road. Open roads were sampled &lt;100 m along from this intersection. One camera trap was used at each site between 1 April and 30 June and again between 30 August and 3 November, annually in 2006–2009.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
