2188: Locate aquaculture systems in areas with fast currents
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Aquaculture systems can negatively impact subtidal benthic invertebrate communities through pollution and diminished water quality (Wu et al. 1994). For instance, it can cause anoxic conditions (lack of oxygen) due to waste build up from fish food and faeces. Locating aquaculture systems in areas with fast currents may help maintain water quality by increasing water exchange, allowing greater dispersal and dilution of pollutant loads (Hall-Spencer et al. 2006; Sarà et al. 2006). Reducing the risk of a built-up of pollution levels may prevent negative impacts on subtidal benthic invertebrates.
Evidence for other interventions related to the relocation of aquaculture activities are summarised under “Threat: Pollution – Locate aquaculture systems in already impacted areas”, “Locate aquaculture systems in vegetated areas”, and “Locate artificial reefs near aquaculture systems (and vice versa) to act as biofilters”.
 
Hall-Spencer J., White N., Gillespie E., Gillham K. & Foggo A. (2006) Impact of fish farms on maerl beds in strongly tidal areas. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 326, 1–9.
Sarà G., Scilipoti D., Milazzo M. & Modica A. (2006) Use of stable isotopes to investigate dispersal of waste from fish farms as a function of hydrodynamics. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 313, 261–270.
Wu R.S.S., Lam K.S., MacKay D.W., Lau T.C. & Yam V. (1994) Impact of marine fish farming on water quality and bottom sediment: A case study in the sub-tropical environment. Marine Environmental Research, 38, 115–145.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of locating aquaculture systems in areas with fast currents on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
