3383: Treat tree/shrub seeds with chemicals before sowing: brackish/saline wetlands
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Acids and bleach may weaken the seed coat, increasing its permeability to water and gases which are essential breaking dormancy and inducing germination (Baskin & Baskin 2014). They may also sterilize seeds, killing fungi that may otherwise reduce germination rates. Hormones are widely used in agriculture and horticulture to stimulate germination and growth (Small & Degenhardt 2018). Other molecules such as nitrates act as signals within plants and may stimulate germination (Alboresi et al. 2005).
To be summarized as evidence for this action, studies must have explicitly compared the performance of treated and untreated seeds. Studies that simply report the performance of treated seeds are not summarized here. Studies do not have to be in flooded/saturated soils, as long as they involve wetland-characteristic species.
Related actions: Soak seeds before sowing; Chill seeds before sowing; Heat seeds before sowing; Expose seeds to light before sowing; Physically damage seeds before sowing.
Alboresi A., Gestin C., Leydecker M.T., Bedu M., Meyer C. & Truong, H.N. (2005) Nitrate, a signal relieving seed dormancy in Arabidopsis. Plant, Cell & Environment, 28, 500–512.
Baskin C.C. & Baskin J.M. (2014) Seeds: Ecology, Biogeography and Evolution of Dormancy and Germination, Second Edition. Academic Press.
Small C.C. & Degenhardt D. (2018) Plant growth regulators for enhancing revegetation success in reclamation: a review. Ecological Engineering, 118, 43–51.

Key Messages:
We found no studies that evaluated the effects – on trees/shrubs typical of brackish/saline wetlands – of treating their seeds with chemicals before sowing.
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
