2203: Install stormwater traps or grids
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Litter can enter the marine environment through a multitude of pathways. Urban debris can enter the marine environment in unprocessed stormwaters running off from land via stormwater conduits and drainage systems (Armitage & Rooseboom 2000). Once in the marine environment, litter can accumulate and subsist for a long time due to very slow degradation (Andrady 2015). Litter can negatively affect subtidal benthic invertebrates through physical damage, smothering and habitat modification, but also through the introduction of bacteria, nutrients, toxic substances and other solid particles (Gall & Thompson 2015). Stormwater traps or grids are designed to prevent litter from entering stormwaters (Armitage & Rooseboom 2000; Phillips 1999). Their installation can potentially reduce the amount of urban litter entering the marine environment, and reduce the risks associated with this pollution on subtidal benthic invertebrates.
Evidence for intervention related to pollution from sewage system is summarised under “Threat: Pollution – Set or improve minimum sewage treatment standards”, and “Limit the amount of storm wastewater overflow”.
 
Andrady A.L. (2015) Persistence of plastic litter in the oceans. Pages 57–72 in: Marine anthropogenic litter. Springer, Cham.
Armitage N. & Rooseboom A. (2000) The removal of urban litter from stormwater conduits and streams: Paper 1- The quantities involved and catchment litter management options. Water Science and Technology, 26, 181–188.
Phillips D.I. (1999). A new litter trap for urban drainage systems. Water Science and Technology, 39, 85–92.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of installing stormwater traps or grids on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
