3912: Introduce mated females to increase genetic diversity 
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Small, remnant populations of butterflies and moths, which are isolated from other populations, may begin to suffer from reduced genetic diversity arising from inbreeding. The release of mated females from other populations should introduce more genetic diversity into a small population, and this may reduce the extinction risk of the focal population.
CAUTION: Remnant populations can benefit from local genetic adaptation to their environment, and the introduction of genetic diversity from other populations may dilute the local adaptation. Individuals from other populations may also carry diseases or parasites to the remnant population. Both factors could put the remnant population at risk, so care should be taken when considering this action. In addition, before translocating butterflies and moths, the impact of the removal of individuals from the donor site must be considered, to avoid harming existing populations.
For studies on the release of translocated or captive-bred butterflies and moths to areas where the species does not occur, see “Translocate to re-establish populations in known or believed former range”, “Translocate to establish populations outside of known range” and “Release captive-bred individuals to the wild”.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of introducing mated females to increase genetic diversity.

‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
