2954: Flood cropland when fallow to conserve freshwater marshes
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Flooding cropland during fallow seasons or years, when crops are not being grown, could allow wetland plant communities to develop temporarily. If this fallow period occurs within a yearly cycle, annual plant species will dominate. If the fallow period is long enough and at the right time of year, these species may be able to complete their life cycle within cropland.
Related interventions: Raise water level to restore degraded marshes or swamps; Raise water level to restore/create marshes or swamps from other land uses.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects, on freshwater marsh vegetation, of flooding cropland during fallow seasons or years. The study was in Brazil.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in Brazil found that flooding rice fields during their fallow period affected the overall community composition of wetland plants, but that the nature of the effect depended on when fields were surveyed.
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): The same study found that flooding rice fields during their fallow period had no significant effect on wetland plant species richness per site and per survey, although fewer species were recorded in the flooded fields over the year of the study.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE
 
VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, site comparison study in 2005–2006 of six rice fields in southern Brazil (Rolon & Maltchik 2010) found that rice fields that were flooded when fallow contained a different wetland plant community to rice fields that remained drained when fallow, but with similar species richness and biomass. The overall wetland plant community composition in the rice fields depended on the combination of flooding regime (whether fields were flooded or drained when uncultivated) and survey period (whether fields were cultivated or fallow when surveyed; data reported as a graphical analysis). Flooded and drained fields supported statistically similar species richness (flooded: 4–12 species/1.5 m2/survey; drained: 2–15 species/1.5 m2/survey) and biomass (flooded: 1–85 g/m2/survey; drained: 1–35 g/m2/survey) of wetland plants. However, only 22–31 different wetland plant species were recorded in flooded fields over the study year, compared to a total of 31–44 in drained fields. Methods: Between June 2005 and June 2006, wetland vegetation was surveyed in six rice fields (six 0.25-m2 quadrats/field/survey). Surveys covered all stages of the rice cultivation cycle, including cultivated (field preparation and rice growth) and uncultivated (post-harvest and fallow) periods. All fields were flooded when cultivated. During the uncultivated periods three of the fields were flooded and three were drained. Above-ground vegetation collected from each quadrat was dried before weighing.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
