2778: Introduce and enforce legislation to prevent intentional killing of mammals at wild fisheries
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Marine and freshwater mammals may be intentionally killed at wild fisheries to reduce predation on fish catches and damage to fishing gear (Read 2005), or for use as bait (Mintzer et al. 2018) or food (Clapham & Van Waerebeek 2007). Legislation may be introduced that prevents the intentional killing of mammals. Laws already exist in many countries. However, compliance can be low (e.g. Mangel et al. 2010) and enforcement may be required to prevent illegal killing of mammals.
For a similar intervention, see Introduce and enforce legislation to prevent intentional killing of mammals at aquaculture systems.
Mangel J.C., Alfaro-Shigueto J., Van Waerebeek K., Cáceres C., Bearhop S., Witt M.J. & Godley B.J. (2010) Small cetacean captures in Peruvian artisanal fisheries: high despite protective legislation. Biological Conservation, 143, 136–143.
Mintzer V.J., Diniz K. & Frazer T.K. (2018) The use of aquatic mammals for bait in global fisheries. Frontiers in Marine Science, 5.
Read A.J. (2005) Bycatch and depredation. Pages 5–17 in: Reynolds J.E., Perrin W.F., Reeves R.R., Montgomery S. & Ragen T.J. (eds.) Marine mammal research: conservation beyond crisis. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.
Clapham P. & Van Waerebeek K. (2007) Bushmeat and bycatch: the sum of the parts. Molecular Ecology, 16, 2607–2609.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of introducing and enforcing legislation to prevent intentional killing of mammals at wild fisheries.

‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
