1464: Re-route vehicles around protected areas 
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Many national parks and other protected areas are intersected by roads, especially in the developed world, and more recently, in tropical nations. For example, in Indonesia, the government is planning large, paved roads through Gunung Leuser Ecosystem and Kerinci Seblat, the two most important national parks for Sumatran tiger conservation (Bass et al. 2010). Apart from heavy vehicle traffic and the threats associated with that, vehicles that transport goods from around protected areas (e.g. charcoal and other natural resources collected outside and inside the protected area) to cities pose an exceptional threat to primates and their habitats. First, they increase the probability of successful alien plant invasions into pristine areas (Caro et al. 2014). Secondly, heavy vehicles like trucks have different stopping characteristics from passenger cars and so collisions between trucks and wildlife may be particularly severe. For example, trucks may require 50% more distance to stop than passenger cars (Zimmermann 2009). This intervention involves re-routing trucks around protected areas and/or high primate density areas to prevent the spread of invasive species into natural primate habitat and to reduce primate-vehicle collisions.
 
Bass M.S., Finer M., Jenkins C.N., Kreft H., Cisneros-Heredia D.F., McCracken S.F., Pitman N.C.A., English P.H., Swing K., Villa G., Di Fiore A., Voigt C.C. & Kunz T.C. (2010) Global conservation significance of Ecuador’s Yasuní National Park. PLoS ONE, 5, e8767. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0008767.
Caro T., Dobson A., Marshall A.J. & Peres C.A. (2014) Compromise solutions between conservation and road building in the tropics. Current Biology, 24, 722–725.
Zimmermann  K. (2009) Additional dilemma zone protection for trucks at high-speed signalized intersections. Transportation Research Record, 2009, 82–88.

Key Messages:

We found no evidence for the effects of re-routing vehicles containing invasive species around protected areas on primate populations.

'No evidence' for an action means we have not yet found any studies that directly and quantitatively tested this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Primate Conservation
Description: Primate Synopsis
