2145: Use different bait species in traps
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Traps or pots are static gears often used to fish for crabs or lobsters. They consist of structures into which species of commercial interest enter through funnels. These funnels encourage entry but limit escape, and often catch a large amount of unwanted catch species (Stevens 1996). Traps or pots can also be baited to further encourage entry. By using a different bait species, for instance one that is less attractive to certain unwanted catch species, the amount of unwanted catch can potentially be reduced (Major et al. 2017). Evidence for other interventions related to reducing accidental and/or unwanted catch in trap and pot fishery is summarised under “Threat: Biological resource use – Modify the position of traps”, “Modify the design of traps”, “Fit one or more soft, semi-rigid, or rigid grids or frames on pots and traps” and “Fit one or more mesh escape panels/windows on pots and traps”.
 
Major R.N., Taylor D.I., Connor S., Connor G. & Jeffs A.G. (2017) Factors affecting bycatch in a developing New Zealand scampi potting fishery. Fisheries Research, 186, 55–64.
Stevens B.G. (1996) Crab bycatch in pot fisheries. Solving bycatch: considerations for today and tomorrow, 151–158.

Key Messages:

One study examined the effects of using different bait species in traps on subtidal benthic invertebrates. The study took place in the South Pacific Ocean (New Zealand).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Unwanted catch abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the South Pacific Ocean found that the type of bait used in fishing pots did not change the amount of unwanted invertebrates caught.


Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, controlled study in 2014–2015 in two seabed areas in the South Pacific Ocean, New Zealand (Major et al. 2017) found that the type of bait used in the New Zealand scampi Metanephros challengeri pot fishery did not change the amount of unwanted invertebrates caught, in either area. The amount of unwanted invertebrates caught was similar in pots baited with mackerel Scomber australasicus, barracouta Thyrsites atun, or squid Nototodarus sloanii (abundance data not shown). In two areas, three bait species were tested: mackerel vs squid, and barracouta vs squid (mackerel vs barracouta not tested). At Chatham Rise from November–December 2014, traps baited with either mackerel or squid (equal number of traps) were tested during three deployments (three 500 m lines of 30 traps/deployment). At Cape Palliser in April 2015, traps baited with either barracouta or squid (equal number of traps) were tested during three deployments (one 500 m line of 30 traps/deployment). Traps were recovered after 18 hours, and unwanted invertebrate catch identified and counted.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
