2206: Recover lost fishing gear
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Fishing is an important source of marine litter (Gall & Thompson 2015; Matsuoka et al. 2005). Once in the marine environment, discarded or lost fishing gears, often referred to as ‘ghost fishing’ (Matsuoka et al. 2005), can accumulate and subsist for a long time due to very slow degradation. There, it can harm subtidal benthic invertebrates through physical damage, entanglement, smothering and habitat modification (Gall & Thompson 2015; Gilardi et al. 2010). ‘Ghost fishing’ gear, once located, can be recovered and removed from the marine environment, which can reduce the risk of subtidal benthic invertebrates getting caught or harmed (Gilardi et al. 2010).
Evidence for interventions related to pollution from fishing gear are summarised under “Threat: Pollution – Use biodegradable panels in fishing pots”. Evidence for other interventions related to the removal of solid litter from the marine environment are summarised under “Threat: Pollution – Remove litter from the marine environment” and “Remove and clean-up shoreline waste disposal sites”.
 
Gall S.C. & Thompson R.C. (2015) The impact of debris on marine life. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 92, 170–179
Gilardi K.V., Carlson-Bremer D., June J.A., Antonelis K., Broadhurst G. & Cowan T. (2010) Marine species mortality in derelict fishing nets in Puget Sound, WA and the cost/benefits of derelict net removal. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 60, 376–382.
Matsuoka T., Nakashima T. & Nagasawa N. (2005) A review of ghost fishing: scientific approaches to evaluation and solutions. Fisheries Science, 71, 691.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of recovering lost fishing gear on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
