2319: (CFT) Aquatic fauna: Exclude grazers (29c)
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:


Key Messages:
Amphibians (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in wet grasslands in the USA found no difference in the abundance of Yosemite toads between areas with cattle excluded and grazed areas.
Fish (2 studies): One replicated site comparison in grasslands in the USA found higher biomass and abundance of golden trout in areas with cattle excluded, compared to grazed areas. Another one found fewer trout nests in part of a stream with a livestock exclosure, compared to part without a livestock exclosure.
Invertebrates (3 studies): Two replicated studies (one randomized and controlled) in wetlands and grasslands in the USA found more species or families of invertebrates in areas with cattle excluded, compared to grazed areas, for some or all groups. One replicated, randomized, controlled study in grasslands in the USA found fewer aquatic invertebrate species in areas with cattle excluded, compared to grazed areas, in some comparisons. 

Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, randomized, controlled, before-and-after study in 2000–2003 in wet alpine meadows in central California, USA, found fewer aquatic invertebrate species, in plots from which cattle were excluded, compared to grazed plots. Invertebrates: There were fewer aquatic invertebrate species in pools in ungrazed plots, compared to pools in grazed plots, in one of three years (10 vs 11–14 species). Methods: Twenty-four plots were established in 2000, each with three pools (70–1,130 m2) and nine times more dry land than pool. Areas were either continuously or seasonally grazed by cattle (dry season: October–November; wet season: April–June), or grazers were excluded. Before the experiment, the area had been grazed for at least 100 years.
A replicated, paired, site comparison in 2010–2011 in alpine meadows in central California, USA, found few differences in invertebrate communities between grazed and ungrazed meadows. Invertebrates: Similar numbers of invertebrate species were found in ungrazed or grazed meadows (21–34 species/sample). However, there were more species in ungrazed meadows, compared to grazed meadows, in one of four comparisons (non-ground-dwelling invertebrates sampled in mid-grazing season: data not reported). There were more individuals in ungrazed meadows, compared to grazed meadows, in mid-season, but not early season (data not reported). Three of 99 families of invertebrates had more individuals in ungrazed, compared to grazed meadows (data not reported). There were no differences in nine other measures of invertebrate communities between ungrazed and grazed meadows. Methods: Ten pairs of meadows were selected in 2010: one that had not been grazed for at least two decades, and one grazed by cattle from July–September with an average stocking density of 18.5 grazed nights/ha/year. Invertebrates and plants were sampled in July/August and September each year at four points within each meadow.
A replicated, randomized, controlled study in 1992–2002 in grazed wetlands in northern California, USA, found more families of insects in streams in ungrazed plots, compared to grazed plots, in a ten-year experiment. Invertebrates: There were more families of insects in streams in ungrazed plots, compared to grazed plots (data not reported). Methods: The ten-year experiment from 1992–2002 was established in three meadows. Within each, three watersheds were randomly assigned to one of three grazing intensities: cattle excluded, light grazing (leaving 800–1,000 pounds of residual dry matter at the end of the season), or moderate grazing (leaving 600–700 pounds). Samples were taken from both the spring and along the creek in each watershed. The three-year experiment was in 1999–2002 in marshy areas within four meadows. Two plots were established in each: one ungrazed and one with moderate grazing. Insects were surveyed every three months in one year. 
A replicated site comparison in 1994 in meadow streams in Inyo National Forest, California, USA, found fewer California golden trout Oncorhynchus mykiss aguabonita nests in part of a stream with a livestock exclosure, and fewer nests in narrower, deeper streams. Fish: Fewer trout nests (redds) were found in part of stream with a livestock exclosure, compared to part without a livestock exclosure (0 vs 52 nests; 0 vs 0.42 nests/m2), in the Upper Ramshaw Creek. In Mulkey Creek, fewer trout nests were found in narrow streams, compared to wide streams (0 vs 0.27 nests/m2), and grazer exclusions were associated with narrower streams in this area, in previous studies. Methods: Trout nest density was measured in narrow (45–125 m) and wide (53–130 m) stretches of streams (five replicates each) in Mulkey Creek. In the Upper Ramshaw Creek, nest density was measured inside (upstream) and outside (downstream) of a livestock exclosure. Nests were surveyed six times between 1 May and 5 June
A replicated site comparison in 1993–1994 in alpine meadows in central California, USA, found more golden trout Oncorhynchus mykiss aguabonita in streams in areas of meadows from which cattle were excluded, compared to grazed areas. Fish: More golden trout were found in streams in ungrazed plots, compared those in three of four grazed plots (1.4–2.7 vs 1.3–2.2 fish/m2). Golden trout biomass was higher in streams in ungrazed plots, compared those in three of four grazed plots (20–21 vs 16–18 g/m2). Methods: Fences were erected in 1983 and 1991 in two meadows to exclude cattle from a total of three areas. Fish and vegetation were monitored in 125 m sections either upstream or downstream of the exclosures and inside them (a total of seven sites, three ungrazed) in August 1993–1994. Fish were surveyed by electrofishing and vegetation using transects every 5 m along the stream. Areas outside the exclosures were grazed by cattle in July and September.
A replicated, randomized, controlled study in 2006–2010 in alpine meadows in central California, USA, found no difference in the density of young Yosemite toads Anaxyrus canorus, the density of tadpoles, or the proportion of pools occupied by toads between plots with or without cattle excluded. Amphibians: The densities of young toads and tadpoles, and the proportion of pools that were occupied by toads, did not differ between plots with or without cattle excluded (0–12 toads/ha, 20–4,100 tadpoles/ha, 15–63% occupied pools). Methods: In 2005, 14 meadows were selected and randomly assigned to one of three treatments: unfenced (grazed, five meadows), fenced around toad breeding areas (five meadows), or fenced around the whole meadow (four meadows). Before the experiment, all meadows had been grazed been late June and September. Tadpoles were surveyed once/summer and young toads were surveyed twice/year.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Cool Farm Biodiversity
Description: 
