3917: Maintain traditional orchards to benefit butterflies and moths 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Traditional orchards, with large numbers of veteran trees and managed with no chemical inputs, can support a diverse community of invertebrates, including butterflies and moths. For example, 12% of all British butterfly and moth species were recorded in a single summer in three small, traditionally managed orchards (Smart & Winnall 2006). However, the dual threats of intensification and abandonment have led to the loss of many traditionally managed orchards. Restoring and maintaining extensive, low-input management of orchards – including pruning trees, occasional mowing or light grazing between the trees, and limiting the application of pesticides and herbicides – may benefit a large number of butterfly and moth species.
Smart M.J. & Winnall R.A. (2006) The biodiversity of three traditional orchards within the Wyre Forest SSSI in Worcestershire: a survey by the Wyre Forest Study Group (ENRR707). English Nature Research Reports, No 707.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects of maintaining traditional orchards on butterflies and moths. One study was in each of the USA and Germany.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in Germany found that managed orchards had a similar community composition of butterflies and burnet moths to abandoned orchards.
Richness/diversity (2 studies): One replicated, site comparison study in Germany found that managed orchards had a similar species richness of butterflies and burnet moths to abandoned orchards. One controlled study in the USA found that an unmanaged and a partially managed orchard had a greater species richness and diversity of leaf-eating arthropods (including caterpillars) than a commercially managed orchard.

POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in Germany found that managed orchards had a lower abundance of butterflies and burnet moths than abandoned orchards.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Supporting Evidence:
A controlled study in 1984–1988 in three orchards in West Virginia, USA (Brown & Welker 1992) found that orchards with reduced management had more leaf-eating arthropod species, including caterpillars, and greater diversity, than a conventionally managed orchard. Three to five years after establishment, the number of species and diversity of leaf-eating arthropods (e.g. insects and mites) in an unmanaged (23–27 species) and a partially managed (21–33 species) orchard were higher than in a conventionally managed orchard (7–11 species, see paper for diversity data). Over five years, the diversity increased in the reduced management orchards, but in the conventionally managed orchard diversity decreased in the third year and remained low (see paper for details). In spring 1984, three orchards (0.30–0.35 ha) were planted with young trees (1–2 cm diameter). Two reduced management orchards had five apple cultivars at 5 × 4-m spacing. One conventional orchard had one apple cultivar at 5 × 7.5-m spacing. The unmanaged orchard was mown three times/year in 1984–1985, but unmanaged thereafter. The partially managed orchard was pruned commercially, with four annual herbicide applications and monthly mowing. The conventionally managed orchard was pruned and fertilized, mown every 3–4 weeks, and received regular herbicide and pesticide applications, which increased in the third year. From April–September 1984–1988, all leaf-eating arthropods were recorded on 5–10 randomly selected trees/orchard, 4–5 times/year.
A replicated, site comparison study in 2015 in 20 orchard meadows in Saxony, Germany (Ernst et al. 2017) found that managed orchards had a lower abundance of butterflies and burnet moths than abandoned orchards, but species richness and community composition was similar between sites. In managed orchard meadows, the abundance of 35 species of farmland butterflies and burnet moths (16–36 individuals) and 20 species of woodland butterflies and burnet moths (17–20 individuals) was lower than in abandoned orchards meadows (farmland: 25–59; woodland: 36–39 individuals). However, the species richness of both farmland and woodland species was similar in managed (farmland: 4–7; woodland: 4 species) and abandoned (farmland: 4–9; woodland: 4–6 species) orchards. The community composition was also similar in managed and abandoned orchards (data presented as model results). Twenty orchard meadows (0.85–3.34 ha) were surveyed. Eight were managed by summer grazing (May–September, &lt;1 animal/ha, with cattle, sheep, goat, horse or donkey), two were managed by mowing, and 10 were abandoned (not grazed or mown). From May–August 2015, butterflies and burnet moths were surveyed three times along a 20-minute transect on a 0.8 ha patch at each site. Butterflies and burnet moths were classified as 35 farmland and 20 woodland species.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
