2216: Restore habitats and/or habitat-forming (biogenic) species following extreme events
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Extreme events, such as short periods of unusually high or low temperatures, heavy flooding episodes, or intense storms with heavy rainfall, strong winds and scouring, can profoundly impact the marine environment through alterations in environmental conditions and sediment type (Smale & Wernberg 2013). Extreme events are expected to intensify with on-going climate change (Easterling et al. 2000), with likely negative consequences for subtidal benthic invertebrates. For instance, heat waves and flooding episodes have been associated with declines in benthic communities, including bivalves, crustaceans, and worms in Portugal (Grillo et al. 2011). Restoring habitats and/or habitat-forming (biogenic) species following extreme events may potentially help subtidal benthic invertebrate species recover following the disturbances.
Interventions aimed at restoring habitats and/or habitat-forming species, outside of the context of climate change, are listed in the following chapters: “Species management” and “Habitat restoration and creation”.
 
Easterling D.R., Meehl G.A., Parmesan C., Changnon S.A., Karl T.R. & Mearns L.O. (2000) Climate extremes: observations, modeling, and impacts. Science 289, 2068–2074.
Grilo T.F., Cardoso P.G., Dolbeth M., Bordalo M.D. & Pardal M.A. (2011) Effects of extreme climate events on the macrobenthic communities’ structure and functioning of a temperate estuary. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 62, 303–311.
Smale D.A. & Wernberg T. (2013. Extreme climatic event drives range contraction of a habitat-forming species. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 280, 1754.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of restoring habitats and/or habitat-forming species following extreme events on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
