3861: Retain or plant trees to act as windbreaks 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Even under normal weather conditions many species of butterfly and moth, particularly those which are weak fliers, show a preference for sheltered areas (Hayes et al. 2018). However, during extreme weather events, high winds are a particular problem as they prevent adults from being able to fly, and therefore potentially find food, defend territories, or mate. Retaining or planting trees, which act as wind breaks, may enable butterflies and moths to maintain activity during higher winds, reducing the impact of extreme weather events resulting from climate change.
Hayes M.P., Rhodes M.W., Turner E.C., Hitchcock G.E., Knock R.I., Lucas C.B.H. & Chaney P.K. (2018) Determining the long-term habitat preferences of the Duke of Burgundy butterfly, Hamearis lucina, on a chalk grassland reserve in the UK. Journal of Insect Conservation, 22, 329–343.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of retaining or planting trees to act as windbreaks. This study was in Sweden.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Use (1 study): One site comparison study in Sweden reported that sheltered grassland strips were more likely to be used by one of four butterfly species than strips providing nectar resources or no resources.


Supporting Evidence:
A site comparison study in 2003 in a grassland in Uppsala, Sweden (Söderström & Hedblom 2007) reported that grassland strips providing shelter were more likely to be used by one of four butterfly species than strips providing nectar resources or strips with no resources. Results were not tested for statistical significance. Of 27 mazarine blue Polyommatus semiargus released on a sheltered strip with few flowers, 11 flew along it, compared to 4/29 on a flower-rich strip with no shelter, and 5/29 on a strip with no shelter and few flowers. Of 27 pearly heath Coenonympha arcania released on the sheltered strip, 4 flew along it, compared to 12/31 released on the flower-rich strip and 5/30 on the unsheltered strip with few flowers. The numbers of common blue Polyommatus icarus and ringlet Aphantophus hyperantus which flew along strips were similar between strip types (see paper for details). Three 30 × 2 m strips of long grass (21–28 cm high) were created in a field. One strip had nectar resources removed but was sheltered by a plantation on one side, one had abundant nectar resources but no shelter, and one had neither shelter nor nectar resources. The surrounding grassland was cut to 2–4 cm. From 27 June–16 July 2003, butterflies were caught in the morning in six grasslands, and transported to the experimental site (&lt;20 km). Each day, 2–4 individuals/species were released, one-by-one, from the north end of each strip. Butterflies were followed for two minutes, and the distance and direction travelled were recorded.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
