1536: Prevent gene contamination by alien primate species introduced by humans, through exclusion (e.g. fences) or translocation
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
This intervention aims to prevent the breeding/mixing of genes (hybridizing) of alien (non-native) and native primate species through exclusion by e.g. primate-proof fences or by translocation of the alien species. There are not many cases in the world where alien and native primate species co-occur and breed with one another. One example is the threatened golden-headed lion tamarin Leonthopithecus chrysomelas that was introduced in Niterói city forests (Rocha et al. 2011). L. chrysomelas hybridizes with the native species L. rosalia thereby weakening the latter’s gene pool (Rocha et al. 2011). Rocha and Bergallo (2012) recommend that for populations of threatened species in areas outside their original distribution, a programme is needed that includes identification of areas within the natural range where the species is extinct, removal of the causes of extinction in those areas, then gradual removal of the species from its introduced range and release in the relocation areas following the IUCN guidelines for reintroduction of species.’
 
Rocha C.F.D., Bergallo H.G. & Mazzoni R. (2011) Invasive vertebrates in Brazil. Pages 53–103 in: D. Pimentel (ed.) Biological Invasions: Economic and Environmental Costs of Alien Plant, Animal and Microbe Species. Taylor and Francis, New York.
Rocha C.F.D. & Bergallo H.G. (2012) When invasive exotic populations are threatened with extinction. Biodiversity Conservation, 21, 3729–3730.

Key Messages:

We found no evidence for the effects of preventing gene contamination by alien primate species introduced by humans, through exclusion or translocation on primate populations.

'No evidence' for an action means we have not yet found any studies that directly and quantitatively tested this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Primate Conservation
Description: Primate Synopsis
