2540: Leave headlands in fields unsprayed
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Conservation headland management may involve restricting fertiliser, herbicide and insecticide spraying along a strip through a sown arable crop. Typically, as under agri-environment schemes practiced in Europe, this may be a 6-m-wide strip with selected herbicide applications permitted to control certain weeds or invasive species.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects on mammals of leaving headlands in fields unsprayed. One study was in the UK and one was in the Netherlands.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (2 STUDIES)

Use (2 studies): Two replicated studies (one also controlled) in the UK and the Netherlands, found that crop edge headlands that were not sprayed with pesticides were used more by mice than were sprayed crop edges.


Supporting Evidence:
A replicated study in 1986–1987 in an arable field, in Oxfordshire, UK (Tew et al. 1992) found that not spraying herbicide on headlands of crop at the field edge was associated with higher use of those areas by wood mice Apodemus sylvaticus. The proportion of location fixes obtained for mice in unsprayed or sprayed plots indicated greater selection of unsprayed plots relative to their availability within home ranges (data presented as preference indices). Plots extended 10 m into a winter wheat field and were 20 m long. Plots were either sprayed or not sprayed with a range of agricultural herbicides. Application of other chemicals (insecticides, fungicides, growth regulators and fertilizers) were the same across all plots. Wood mouse movements were monitored by radio-tracking 15 mice, between June and August in each of 1986 and 1987.
A replicated, controlled study in 1990–1993 of six arable farms in the Netherlands (de Snoo 1999) found that unsprayed crop edge headlands were used more by field mice Apodemus spp. than were crop edges sprayed with herbicides and insecticides. Results were not tested for statistical significance. More field mice were caught in unsprayed crop edges (38 mice caught) than in sprayed edges (27 mice caught). Strips 3–6 m wide, 100–450 m long, along the edges of crops, were left unsprayed by herbicides and insecticides and were compared to sprayed crop edges in the same field. Small mammals were surveyed using pitfall traps during 13 weeks in 1990 and 12 weeks in 1991 (all in May–July). The number of strips on which small mammals were surveyed is unclear.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
