1508: Do not allow people to consume food within natural areas where primates can view them 
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
In areas where primates and humans come into close contact with one another, such as at tourist sites, some primate species may develop extremely effective strategies to access the food that is eaten by humans at these sites. However, the consumption of human food wastes by primates can result in their dependency on the human provided food, their habituation to human contact, increased intra and inter-species aggression, and various health implications arising from artificial food sources causing injury and disease (Orams 2002). This intervention aims to reduce the negative impact of consumption of human foods by primates, by disallowing people to consume food within natural areas where primates can view them.
     The use of signage to inform people not to feed primates is discussed under ‘Put up signs to warn people about not feeding primates’. The use of garbage bins inaccessible to primates is discussed under ‘Install ‘primate-proof’ garbage bins’. The implementation and enforcement of ‘no-feeding’ policies is discussed under ‘Implement a ‘no-feeding of wild primates’ policy’.
 
Orams M.B. (2002) Feeding wildlife as a tourism attraction: a review of issues and impacts. Tourism Management, 23, 281–293.

Key Messages:

We found no evidence for the effects of not allowing people to consume food within natural areas where primates can view them on primate populations.

'No evidence' for an action means we have not yet found any studies that directly and quantitatively tested this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Primate Conservation
Description: Primate Synopsis
