3980: Provide or retain set‐aside areas in farmland 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Key Messages:

Nine studies evaluated the effects of providing or retaining set-aside areas in farmland on butterflies and moths. Three studies were in the UK, and one was in each of Germany, Ireland, Switzerland, Hungary, Finland and the USA.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (5 STUDIES)

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in Germany found that butterfly communities in older set-aside fields included species which were less migratory, spent longer as caterpillars, and had fewer generations/year than species found in newer set-aside fields.
Richness/diversity (5 studies): Three of four replicated studies (including one randomized, controlled study and three site comparison studies) in Germany, Ireland, Hungary and Finland found that sown or naturally regenerating set-aside had a greater species richness of butterflies and day-flying moths than cereal fields or pasture, especially when the set-aside was sown with less competitive grasses. One of these studies found a higher species richness of butterflies and day-flying moths in second-year set-aside than in first-year set-aside, but another found no difference in butterfly species richness between 1–3-year-old set-aside. The other study found that set-aside fields had a similar species richness of butterflies and moths to arable and pasture fields. One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that set-aside fields had a similar species richness of butterflies to native prairies.

POPULATION RESPONSE (8 STUDIES)

Abundance (8 studies): Two of five replicated studies (including one randomized, controlled study and four site comparison studies) in the UK, Ireland, Hungary and Finland found that the abundance of butterflies and day-flying moths in sown set-aside was higher than in cereal fields, especially when the set-aside was sown with less competitive grasses. One of these studies found a higher abundance of butterflies and day-flying moths in second-year set-aside than in first-year set-aside, but another found no difference in butterfly abundance between 1–3-year-old set-aside. The other three studies found that fallow and stubble set-aside had a similar abundance of adult butterflies and butterfly and moth caterpillars to arable fields and pasture. Two site comparison studies (including one replicated study) in the UK and Switzerland found that set-aside fields had a similar abundance of butterfly and moth adults and caterpillars to uncultivated field boundaries and extensively farmed land. One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that set-aside fields had a similar abundance of butterflies to native prairies in their first year, but a lower abundance of butterflies thereafter.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
