3308: Add below-ground organic matter before/after planting non-woody plants: freshwater wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Trade off between benefit and harms
Key Messages:

Seven studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of adding below-ground organic matter to freshwater wetlands planted with emergent, non-woody plants. All seven studies were in the USA. Two of the studies were in a greenhouse.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated study of marshes alongside a stream in the USA found that adding compost before planting wetland herbs typically reduced overall plant species richness over the following three growing seasons. Richness was negatively related to the amount of soil organic matter in plots.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated study of marshes alongside a stream in the USA found that adding compost before planting wetland herbs had no significant effect on total vegetation biomass after three growing seasons. Biomass was not significantly related to the amount of soil organic matter in plots.
Characteristic plant abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in an experimental wet basin in the USA found that adding sawdust to plots before sowing a mixture of target sedge meadow species had no significant effect on the density of target species overall or target grass-like species. Adding sawdust sometimes affected the density of target forbs, depending on the presence/diversity of a nurse crop.
Individual species abundance (2 studies): Two replicated, randomized, paired, controlled studies in wetlands in the USA quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. One study found that incorporating woodchips into soil mounds before planting tussock sedge Carex stricta reduced total tussock sedge cover after two growing seasons. The other study reported varying effects of sawdust addition on the abundance of individual plant species, depending on factors such as the species and presence/diversity of a nurse crop.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Individual plant size (4 studies): Three replicated, controlled studies (one also paired) in the USA found that mixing compost into the substrate before planting tussock sedge Carex stricta seedlings typically increased the biomass and/or number of shoots they developed over 2–3 months. However, in one of the studies, compost typically had no significant effect on top of other soil amendments. One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in a wetland in the USA found that incorporating woodchips into soil mounds had no significant effect on the biomass of planted tussock sedge Carex stricta, over two growing seasons.

OTHER

Germination/emergence (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in an experimental wet basin in the USA found that seeds of mixed sedge meadow species had a similar germination rate, over 16 weeks after sowing, in plots with or without added sawdust.
Survival (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in an excavated wetland in the USA found that planted lurid sedge Carex lurida tubers had a higher survival rate, after one year, in plots that had been amended with leaf litter than in unamended plots. One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in a wetland in the USA found that incorporating woodchips into soil mounds increased survival of planted tussock sedge Carex stricta in a drier area, but reduced its survival in a wetter area.
Growth (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in a wetland in the USA found that incorporating woodchips into soil mounds had no significant effect on the growth rate of planted tussock sedge Carex stricta, over two growing seasons.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
