3039: Actively manage water level: brackish/salt marshes
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This action involves active, repeated management of the amount of water in wetlands and when it is present, to mimic the natural hydrology of marshes. This may prevent excessively high or low water levels (e.g. during storm surges or droughts), or maintain wet/dry cycles that are a natural feature of many marshes (e.g. Zacharias & Zamperas 2010).
This action will usually involve some kind of water control structure: a valve, gate, sluice or pump. Water level management might aim to: mirror historical water level fluctuations or stability; manage salinity levels; increase sediment inputs; stimulate growth of desirable plant species; and/or create new wetland plant communities. Studies of “moist soil management”, “structural marsh management” and “environmental flows” along river courses all fall within the scope of this action. Caution: When managing water levels in a focal site, the effect on water levels in neighbouring sites should be considered.
Although water levels may be managed to restore or enhance habitats for waterfowl, information on the value of vegetation for waterfowl (e.g. seed production; productivity measured as CO2 exchange rates) is not summarized in this synopsis. Also, this synopsis does not include information on riparian areas that are not clearly marshes or swamps (e.g. riparian forests that require only a brief flood pulse for germination; Taylor et al. 2006).
Related actions: Raise water level to restore degraded marshes or restore/create marshes from other land uses; Lower water level to restore degraded marshes or restore/create marshes from other land uses; Facilitate tidal exchange to restore degraded marshes or restore/create marshes from other land uses; Manage water level to control problematic plants; Actively manage water level to complement planting.
Junk W.J., Piedade M.T.F., Schöngart J., Cohn-Haft M., Adeney J.M. Wittman F. (2011) A classification of major naturally-occurring Amazonian lowland wetlands. Wetlands, 31, 623–640.
Taylor J.P., Smith L.M. & Haukos D.A. (2006) Evaluation of woody plant restoration in the Middle Rio Grande: ten years after. Wetlands, 26, 1151–1160.
Zacharias I. & Zamparas M. (2010) Mediterranean temporary ponds. A disappearing ecosystem. Biodiversity and Conservation, 19, 3827–3834.

Key Messages:

Ten studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of active water level management in brackish/salt marshes. Six studies were in the USA. There was overlap in the sites used in two of these studies. Two studies were in Canada and based on the same experimental set-up. One study was in France and one was in Tunisia.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community types (1 study): One before-and-after study of a lakeshore brackish/salt marsh in Tunisia reported an increase in coverage of bulrush-dominated vegetation over nine years of freshwater releases into the lake (to increase its level and restore winter flooding of the marsh).
Community composition (3 studies): One replicated, paired, controlled, before-and-after study of brackish marshes in France reported that artificially flooded marshes developed different plant communities, over five years, to fields with unmanaged flooding. One before-and-after, site comparison study of brackish/salt marshes in the USA reported that the overall plant community composition changed more, over four years, in a marsh directly irrigated with treated wastewater than in downstream marshes. One replicated, paired, site comparison study of brackish/salt marshes in the USA reported that that marshes in which water levels were drawn down each spring/autumn (along with disking soils) shared only 24–34% of plant species with marshes that were not drawn down (or disked).
Overall richness/diversity (5 studies): Two replicated, site comparison studies of brackish/salt marshes in the USA found that marshes in which water levels were managed (sometimes along with other interventions) had similar plant species richness and/or diversity to marshes without water level management. One replicated, site comparison study of brackish and salt marshes in the USA reported that marshes in which water levels were managed had similar or higher plant species richness, in winter, than marshes without water level management. One before-and-after, site comparison study of brackish/salt marshes in the USA reported that plant species richness increased, over four years, in marshes directly irrigated with treated wastewater – but only to similar levels as in downstream marshes. One replicated, paired, controlled, before-and-after study of brackish marshes in France reported that the effects of artificial flooding on plant species richness depended on whether the marshes were grazed.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (2 studies): Two replicated, site comparison studies of brackish and salt marshes in the USA reported that marshes in which water levels were managed typically had similar overall vegetation cover to marshes without water level management. One of the studies also reported that cover of standing dead vegetation was higher in the managed marshes than in the unmanaged marshes.
Individual species abundance (6 studies): Six studies quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. For example, four replicated, site comparison studies of brackish and salt marshes in the USA reported mixed effects of water level management on the abundance of saltmeadow cordgrass Spartina patens. One replicated, paired, controlled, before-and-after study of brackish marshes in France reported that the effects of artificial flooding on the cover of individual plant species depended on the flooding (and grazing) regime.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE
 
OTHER

Germination/emergence (2 studies): Two replicated studies of brackish marshes in Canada reported that seedlings of wetland plants germinated in the spring/summer following drawdowns, after a period of deep flooding.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
