3320: Transplant wetland soil before/after planting non-woody plants: freshwater wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Loose soil can be transplanted from a healthy marsh or swamp to a one that is being created or restored. Soil could simply be added to a recipient site, or be used to replace material in the recipient site. Soil transplants can be useful to introduce a chemically and physically suitable substrate for growth of wetland vegetation, and a mixture of soil organisms such as bacteria, fungi and invertebrates (Anderson & Cowell 2004). Thus, soil transplants might be used to aid the initial survival and growth of introduced marsh or swamp plants. Soil transplants usually also contain a mixture of wetland plant seeds, roots, tubers or rhizomes, which could supplement the focal introduced vegetation to create a diverse, wetland-characteristic plant community.
Caution: This action inevitably causes damage to any donor site. Also, transplanted soil could contain invasive plants, animals or microorganisms. A possible solution to these problems is to use soil from healthy marshes or swamps that are earmarked for destruction. Using local donor sites could minimize the spread of invasive species, and make use of communities adapted to local conditions.
Other published names for this action include “salvaged marsh surface replacement”, transplanting “seed banks” and “mulching”. We restrict the latter term to the addition of organic matter that is largely free of plant propagules, e.g. domestic compost or seaweed, to the ground surface.
Related actions: Transplant or replace wetland soil, other than to complement planting; Add upland topsoil before/after planting.
Anderson C.J. & Cowell B.C. (2004) Mulching effects on the seasonally flooded zone of west-central Florida, USA wetlands. Wetlands, 24, 811–819.
Brown S.C. & Bedford B.L. (1997) Restoration of wetland vegetation with transplanted wetland soil: an experimental study. Wetlands, 17, 424–437.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of transplanting wetland soil to freshwater wetlands planted with emergent, non-woody plants. One study was in the USA and one was in Canada.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study of created freshwater marshes in the USA found that those amended with marsh soil developed plant communities characteristic of wetter conditions than unamended marshes. Most marshes had also been planted. All were ≥5 years old.
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): The same study found that marshes amended with marsh soil had similar (dry season) or lower (wet season) plant species richness and diversity to unamended marshes. Most marshes had also been planted. All were ≥5 years old.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE                

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study of created freshwater marshes in the USA reported that amongst planted marshes, adding marsh soil had no significant effect on overall vegetation cover or biomass, after ≥5 years.
Characteristic plant abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study of created freshwater marshes in the USA reported that amongst planted marshes, those also amended with marsh soil had greater cover of wetland-characteristic plants than unamended marshes, after ≥5 years.
Individual species abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in freshwater trenches in Canada found that adding peat-rich soil to pots of mine tailings before planting water sedge Carex aquatilis typically increased its above-ground biomass two growing seasons later.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE
 
OTHER

Survival (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in freshwater trenches in Canada found that adding peat-rich soil to pots of mine tailings either increased or had no significant effect on survival of planted water sedge Carex aquatilis over two growing seasons.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
