3281: Actively manage water level before/after planting non-woody plants: freshwater wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
This action involves active management of water levels in areas planted with marsh or swamp vegetation. It involves repeated management of the amount of water present and/or when it is present. This action will usually involve some kind of water control structure: a valve, gate, sluice or pump.
Related actions: Actively manage water level, other than to complement planting; one-off interventions to Raise water level before/after planting; Facilitate tidal exchange before/after planting; Irrigate before/after planting.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of actively managing water levels in freshwater wetlands planted with emergent, non-woody plants. All three studies were in the USA. Two studies used the same experimental wet basins but planted different species.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One study in a freshwater marsh in the USA found that amongst plots amended with wetland soil, those flooded for longer contained fewer emergent plant species over the rest of the growing season following drawdown.
Characteristic plant richness/diversity (1 study): The same study found that amongst plots amended with wetland soil, those flooded for longer contained fewer wetland-characteristic plant species over the rest of the growing season following drawdown.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE 

Overall abundance (1 study): One study in a freshwater marsh in the USA found that amongst plots amended with wetland soil, those flooded for longer developed more submerged vegetation biomass before drawdown, but developed less emergent vegetation (biomass and stem density) over the rest of the growing season after drawdown.
Individual species abundance (2 studies): Two studies quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. For example, one controlled, before-and-after study in wet basins in the USA found that the effect of mimicking a natural (falling) water regime on lake sedge Carex lacustris biomass and density, in the three years after planting, depended on the year and various environmental factors (e.g. planting density, elevation and weeding of competitors).

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (2 studies): Two controlled studies in wet basins in the USA examined the effect of mimicking a natural (falling) water regime, compared to a stable or rising regime, on the height of sedges over three years after planting. One of the studies found no significant effect on the height of tussock sedge Carex stricta in three of three years. The other study found that the effect on the height of lake sedge Carex lacustris varied within and between years.

OTHER

Survival (2 studies): Two controlled studies in wet basins in the USA examined the effect of mimicking a natural (falling) water regime, compared to a stable or rising regime, on the survival of sedges Carex over three years after planting. The precise effect depended on the year and/or plot elevation. In the first year, sedge survival was typically lower under the falling regime.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
