3202: Lower water level to restore/create freshwater marshes from other land uses
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
This action involves one-off action to lower the water level and restore or create marshes from other land uses, i.e. in areas that do not retain substantial characteristics of the target habitat. By definition, these other land uses will always be aquatic habitats such as reservoirs or lakes. The lowered water level should not depend on continued intervention (e.g. pumping). Specific techniques to reduce water levels include removing dams downstream, or switching off pumps that add water to a focal site. This action includes water level reductions to any depth that could, in theory, support emergent wetland vegetation.
Caution: This action may have negative effects on habitats elsewhere in the catchment. For example, removing dams could flood marshes, swamps or upland habitats downstream. There may also be conflicts with water needs of human populations that need to be managed.
Related actions: Lower water level to restore degraded marshes; Backfill canals or trenches; Actively manage water level; Reprofile/relandscape, which may involve raising the ground surface towards or above the water table; Lower water level to complement planting.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of lowering the water level to restore/create freshwater marshes from other land uses or habitat types. One study was in the USA and one was in the Netherlands.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall extent (1 study): One replicated, before-and-after study of a freshwater wetland in the USA reported that following a drawdown of water levels, emergent vegetation coverage increased in areas that were previously open water.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (1 study): One before-and-after study at the edge of a freshwater lake in the Netherlands reported that following a drawdown of the lake water level, vegetation cover developed in areas that were previously open water. Cover varied between years and elevations.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
