3211: Excavate freshwater pools
Effectiveness rating: Trade off between benefit and harms
Background information and definitions:
Pools are small, discrete water bodies: &lt;8 ha in area or &lt;280 m in diameter (Ramsar Convention Secretariat 2016). They may be permanently or seasonally flooded. Pools may be lost through drainage or filling, or become degraded through pollution, invasion or lack of management. For this intervention, we consider “pools” and “ponds” as synonymous.
To be summarized as evidence for this action, studies must evaluate the effects of excavating pools on emergent vegetation (e.g. coverage of emergent vegetation within permanent pools, or characteristics of vegetation in marshes or swamps around pools). Studies of pools, or zones within pools, that contain little emergent vegetation will be summarized in a future synopsis.
Related actions: Reprofile/relandscape areas larger than pools (freshwater marshes – freshwater swamps).
Ramsar Convention Secretariat (2016) An Introduction to the Convention on Wetlands: Ramsar Handbooks 5th Edition. Ramsar Convention Secretariat, Gland.

Key Messages:

Seven studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation within pools or surrounding marshes/swamps, of excavating freshwater pools. Five studies were in the USA, one was in Guam and one was in Canada. Two of the studies in the USA were based on the same set of pools.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Relative abundance (2 studies): One replicated, paired, site comparison study in a freshwater marsh in Canada reported that a smaller proportion of individual plants around excavated pools were wetland-characteristic species, compared to the proportion around natural pools. The excavated pools were 1–3 years old. One replicated study in the USA reported that excavated pools became dominated by non-native plant species over eight years.
Overall richness/diversity (3 studies): One replicated, paired, site comparison study in a freshwater marsh in Canada found that overall plant species richness and diversity were similar around excavated pools and natural pools, 1–3 years after excavation. Two studies involving freshwater marshes in Guam and the USA simply quantified plant species richness 12–18 months after excavation (along with other interventions).

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that excavated and natural pools had similar cover of emergent vegetation, seven years after excavation. The same was true for submerged vegetation.
Characteristic plant abundance (2 studies): Two replicated studies in the USA reported the abundance of native pool-characteristic species over 3–8 years after excavating pools. One of the studies was also a site comparison and reported that these species were less abundant in the excavated pools than nearby natural pools.
Shrub abundance (2 studies): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that excavated and natural pools had similar cover of shrubby vegetation after seven years. One replicated study in the USA simply quantified shrub abundance over five years after excavating pools/potholes (along with other interventions).
Algae/phytoplankton abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that excavated and natural pools contained a similar biomass of surface-coating algae and phytoplankton, after seven years. The same was true for phytoplankton after eight years.
Individual species abundance (5 studies): Five studies quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. For example, one replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that excavated and natural pools had similar cover of loosestrife Lythrum sp. seven years after excavation, but that excavated pools had greater cover of duckweed Lemna sp., cattails Typha spp. and common reed Phragmites australis.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
