3112: Use grazing to control problematic plants: freshwater marshes
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This action involves using herbivores such as sheep, cows, horses or fish to control problematic plants. Herbivores remove shoots or flowers, limiting plant growth and/or reproduction. They might selectively graze certain plant groups or species (Grant et al. 1987), creating space for other species to grow.
Grazing may be a useful option for control of problematic plants over large areas, or areas that are not easily accessible to equipment. To ensure grazing actually occurs in wetlands within the larger landscape, the breed or population of herbivores should be carefully chosen. Herbivores adapted to upland areas may avoid wetland habitats altogether. Caution: Trampling, erosion and nutrient enrichment from herbivores can have negative impacts on vegetation, especially if the density of herbivores is high.
Bear in mind that the effects of grazing might be highly dependent on how it is carried out (e.g. species, intensity, timing, frequency and duration) and site conditions (e.g. nutrient availability, water levels, presence/density of wild herbivores) (Rinella & Hileman 2009).
For this action, “vegetation” refers to overall or non-target vegetation. Studies that only report responses of target problematic plants have not been summarized.
Related actions: interventions to address domestic livestock as a threat, e.g. Exclude livestock from historically ungrazed sites; Use grazing to maintain or restore disturbance.
Grant S.A., Suckling S.A., Smith H.K., Torvell L., Forbes T.D.A. & Hodgson J. (1987). Comparative studies of diet selection by sheep and cattle: blanket bog and heather moor. Journal of Ecology, 75, 947–960.
Rinella M.J. & Hileman B.J. (2009) Efficacy of prescribed grazing depends on timing intensity and frequency. Journal of Applied Ecology, 46, 796–803.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of using grazing to control problematic plants in freshwater marshes. Two studies were in the USA. One study was in Costa Rica.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in Costa Rica found that amongst plots where cattail-dominated vegetation had been crushed, grazing had no significant effect on the overall plant community composition over 15 months.
Relative abundance (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in a canarygrass-invaded marsh in the USA found that grazing had no significant effect on the relative abundance of the invader: over two years, it declined similarly in grazed and ungrazed plots.
Overall richness/diversity (3 studies): Of three replicated, paired, controlled studies in invaded marshes/wet meadows in the USA and Costa Rica, two found that grazing typically had no significant effect on plant species richness and/or diversity over approximately two years. The other study found that grazed areas had higher plant species richness than ungrazed areas after two months.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in a canarygrass-invaded marsh in the USA found that grazing had no significant effect on total vegetation cover at the ground surface, over two years.
Native/non-target abundance (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in an invaded wet meadow in the USA found that two months of grazing increased cover of non-invasive grass-like plants.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
