3782: Relocate nests/eggs to a nearby natural setting (not including hatcheries): Tortoises, terrapins, side-necked & softshell turtles
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Reptile nests/eggs may be relocated away from specific threats (e.g. egg collecting, flooding, erosion, predation, or being crushed on roads) and reburied in an alternative suitable natural setting where the threat is lower or non-existent. Consideration must be given to the potential impacts of different environmental conditions in the destination location (for example temperature and humidity) on the sex, size, shape, colour, behaviour, movement ability and post-hatching growth of reptile hatchlings (Warner & Andrews 2002, Booth et al. 2006).
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians. See here for: Sea turtles; Snakes & lizards; Crocodilians or Tuatara.
This action does not include studies on the effect of relocating nests/eggs to on-beach hatcheries, which are designated locations on a beach that are often fenced and patrolled, and where larger numbers of nests/eggs tend to be reburied at relatively high densities. Studies on the effect of moving eggs to on-beach hatcheries are discussed in Relocate nests/eggs to a hatchery.
For studies on the effect of relocating eggs into artificial settings, including in polystyrene boxes and other containers, see Relocate nests/eggs for artificial incubation.
Depending on the threat to nests, practitioners may consider other actions such as Threat: Invasive alien and other problematic species – Protect nests and nesting sites from predation and Threat: Biological resource use – Patrol or monitor nesting beaches.
See also: Alter incubation temperatures to achieve optimal/desired sex ratio.
Booth D.T. (2006) Influence of incubation temperature on hatchling phenotype in reptiles. Physiological and Biochemical Zoology, 79, 274–281.
Warner D.A. & Andrews R.M. (2002) Laboratory and field experiments identify sources of variation in phenotypes and survival of hatchling lizards. Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 76, 105–124.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects of relocating nests/eggs to a nearby natural setting on tortoise, terrapin, side-necked & softshell turtle One study was in each of Venezuela, Columbia, Canada and the USA.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (4 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (4 studies): Two of four replicated, controlled studies in Venezuela, Columbia, Canada and the USA found that relocated Arrau turtle and Magdalena river turtle nests had similar hatching success compared to natural nests. One of the studies found that painted turtle and snapping turtle nests relocated to artificial nest mounds had higher hatching success than natural nests. The other study found that relocating diamondback terrapin nests to artificial nest mounds had mixed effects on hatching success compared to natural nests.
Survival (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Venezuela found that Arrau turtle hatchlings from relocated nests had lower survival during their first year compared to hatchlings from natural nests.
Condition (2 studies): One replicated, controlled study in Venezuela found that Arrau turtle hatchlings from relocated nests had more physical abnormalities compared to hatchlings from natural nests. One replicated, controlled study in Columbia found that a similar number of eggs were infested by invertebrates and fungi in relocated and natural nests.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
