2618: Provide/increase anti-poaching patrols
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Poaching is the illegal killing or taking of mammals or other wildlife species. It can lead to population declines or push species towards local extinctions (e.g. Wittemyer et al. 2014). In absence of enforcement, anti-poaching legislation may be insufficient to prevent declines (e.g. López-Bao et al. 2015). Patrols may be instigated to deter or to apprehend poachers.
López-Bao J.V., Blanco J.C., Rodríguez A., Godinho R., Sazatornil V., Alvares F., García E.J., Llaneza L., Rico M., Cortés Y., Palacios V. & Chapron G. (2015) Toothless wildlife protection laws. Biodiversity and Conservation, 24, 2105–2108.
Wittemyer G., Northrup J.M., Blanc J., Douglas-Hamilton I., Omondi P. & Burnham K.P. (2014) Illegal killing for ivory drives global decline in African elephants. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111, 13117–13121.

Key Messages:

Seven studies evaluated the effects of providing or increasing anti-poaching patrols on mammals. Two studies were in Thailand and one each was in Brazil, Iran, Lao People's Democratic Republic, South Africa and Tajikistan.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (7 STUDIES)

Abundance (6 studies): Two studies, in Thailand and Iran, found more deer and small mammals and more urial sheep and Persian leopards close to ranger stations (from which anti-poaching patrols were carried out) than further from them. One of three before-and-after studies, in Brazil, Thailand and Lao People's Democratic Republic, found that ranger patrols increased mammal abundance. The other two studies found that patrols did not increase tiger abundance. A site comparison study in Tajikistan found more snow leopard, argali, and ibex where anti-poaching patrols were conducted.
Survival (1 study): A study in South Africa found that anti-poaching patrols did not deter African rhinoceros poaching.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
