3871: Use shelterwood harvesting instead of clearcutting 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Harvesting of timber within forests can be carried out by clearcutting sites or by various methods of harvesting a proportion of trees. Shelterwood harvesting is a management technique designed to obtain even-aged timber without clearcutting. It involves harvesting trees in a series of partial cuttings, with trees removed uniformly over the plot, which allows new seedlings to grow from the seeds of older trees. This can help maintain characteristic forest species and increase structural diversity of stands.
For other options for harvesting timber, see “Use selective or reduced impact logging instead of conventional logging”, “Harvest groups of trees or use thinning instead of clearcutting”, “Use patch retention harvesting instead of clearcutting”, “Use leave-tree harvesting instead of clearcutting” and “Retain riparian buffer strips during timber harvest”.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of using shelterwood harvesting instead of clearcutting. All three studies were in the USA.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Richness/diversity (3 studies): One controlled, before-and-after study in the USA found that the species richness of macro-moths was higher after a forest was managed by shelterwood harvesting, than after harvest by patch-cutting or clearcutting, and the richness in the shelterwood harvested forest was similar to a thinned forest and an unharvested forest. One replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in the USA found that forests managed by shelterwood harvesting had a similar species richness of moths to forests managed by single tree harvesting, group selection harvesting or clearcutting, but a lower species richness than unharvested forest. One replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in the USA found that moth species richness recovered faster after shelterwood harvesting than after group selection harvesting or clearcutting.

POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
