3512: Cease livestock grazing: Wetland
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Grazing by livestock reduces vegetation height and ground cover, alters plant abundance and diversity, creating openings for seed growth and preventing reed or shrub growth. These changes can have beneficial (Tesauro & Ehrenfeld 2007) or detrimental effects (Howland et al. 2014) on reptile populations depending on the reptile species, grazing intensity, timing and conjunction with burning regimes. Studies included in this intervention measure the impact of ceasing grazing on reptiles. Studies that compare the effects of varying intensities of grazing or different types of grazing regimes on reptiles are included under the intervention Modify grazing regime.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by habitat type. See here for: Grassland & shrubland or Forest, open woodland & savanna.
For interventions that aim to reduce the detrimental effects of grazing by wild herbivores see Threat: Invasive or problematic species - Remove or control invasive or problem herbivores and seed eaters.
Howland B., Stojanovic D., Gordon I.J., Manning A.D., Fletcher D. & Lindenmayer D.B. (2014) Eaten out of house and home: impacts of grazing on ground-dwelling reptiles in Australian grasslands and grassy woodlands. PLoS One, 9, e105966.
Tesauro J. & Ehrenfeld D. (2007) The effects of livestock grazing on the bog turtle [Glyptemys (=Clemmys) muhlenbergii]. Herpetologica, 63, 293–300.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects of ceasing livestock grazing in wetlands on reptile populations. One study was in the USA and one was in Australia.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Abundance (2 studies): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that ungrazed sites had fewer bog turtles than grazed sites. One replicated, randomized, controlled study in Australia found that ungrazed areas had similar overall reptile and amphibian abundance compared to that were grazed, burned or grazed and burned (to remove invasive non-native para grass). The study also found that unmanaged areas (no grazing or burning) had a higher abundance of one skink species than areas with grazing and/or burning.
Occupancy/range (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that juvenile box turtles were present less frequently in ungrazed sites compared to grazed sites.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
