1830: Introduce nurse plants (to aid focal peatland plants)
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Nurse or companion plants can be planted alongside focal plants to help the focal plants establish (Padilla & Pugnaire 2006). Nurse plants can bind together loose peat and reduce harsh environmental conditions (temperature fluctuations, desiccation and strong sunlight). Nurse plants must be able to tolerate these conditions, but invasive species (that spread easily) and species that may outcompete focal plants (physically or chemically) should be avoided. Instead, it is expected that nurse plants are eventually outcompeted by focal plants.
Herbs are common nurse plants in temperate peatlands, creating shelter for mosses. They may be directly planted or added as seed (the latter being a more efficient way to cover larger areas). Haircap moss Polytrichum strictum may act as a nurse plant for Sphagnum moss and vascular plant seedlings (based on a correlative study of natural colonization, and an experiment using non-peatland species; Groeneveld et al. 2007). In tropical peat swamps, light-tolerant trees can be used to shelter shade-loving trees.
To be included as evidence in this section, studies must have deliberately introduced nurse plants before planting focal peatland vegetation. Studies that planted peatland vegetation into existing nurse vegetation (e.g. Sliva & Pfadenhauer 1999), or examined natural colonization of nurse vegetation (e.g. Groeneveld et al. 2007) are not included.
Key peatland types where this action may be appropriate: bogs, fens/fen meadows, tropical peat swamps.
Related actions: introduce nurse plants as one of many combined interventions e.g. lime/seed/fertilizer; introduce nurse plants without introducing peatland vegetation.
Groeneveld E.V.G., Masse A. & Rochefort L. (2007) Polytrichum strictum as a nurse-plant in peatland restoration. Restoration Ecology, 15, 709–719.
Padilla F.M. & Pugnaire F.I. (2006) The role of nurse plants in the restoration of degraded environments. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 4, 196–202.
Sliva J. & Pfadenhauer J. (1999) Restoration of cut-over raised bogs in southern Germany – a comparison of methods. Applied Vegetation Science, 2, 137–148.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects, on peatland vegetation, of introducing nurse plants to aid focal peatland plants. Two studies were in bogs. One was in a tropical peat swamp.
Survival (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in Malaysia reported that planting nurse trees had no effect on survival of planted peat swamp tree seedlings (six species).
Cover (2 studies): Two replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after studies in bogs in the USA and Canada found that planting nurse herbs had no effect on cover, after 2–3 years, of other planted vegetation (mosses/bryophytes, vascular plants or total cover).


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
