2265: Offset habitat loss from human activity by restoring or creating habitats elsewhere
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Habitat restoration and creation interventions can be undertaken at a site as a biodiversity offset strategy to replace the biodiversity lost at an impacted site, with the aim to achieve ‘no net loss’ of overall biodiversity (Ives & Bekessy 2015). Offsetting can be done “in-kind”, where the new habitat is similar to the lost one (for example creating coral reefs to replace lost coral reefs elsewhere), or “out-of-kind”, where the new habitat is different to the lost one (for example creating an artificial reef to replace lost mudflats elsewhere; evidence summarised under “Habitat restoration and creation – Create artificial reefs” and “Create artificial reefs of different 3-D structure and material used”). When offsetting is undertaken in the marine and coastal environment, it can help promote subtidal benthic invertebrate biodiversity (Jones et al. 2007).
 
Ives C.D. & Bekessy S.A. (2015) The ethics of offsetting nature. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 13, 568–573.
Jones D.A., Ealey T., Baca B., Livesey S. & Al-Jamali F. (2007) Gulf desert developments encompassing a marine environment, a compensatory solution to the loss of coastal habitats by infill and reclamation: The case of the Pearl City Al-Khiran, Kuwait. Aquatic Ecosystem Health & Management, 10, 268–276.

Key Messages:

Two studies examined the effects of offsetting habitat loss from human activity by restoring or creating habitats elsewhere on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations. One study was in the Delaware Bay (USA), the other in the Persian Gulf (Kuwait).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One study in the Persian Gulf found that an area of low ecological value restored to offset habitat lost to land reclamation was colonized by over 198 invertebrate species.

POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (1 STUDY) 

Biological production (1 study): One study in Delaware Bay found that an artificial reef built to offset lost soft-sediment habitat had higher annual secondary production/unit area from sessile invertebrates, but lower total annual secondary production, compared to habitat similar to that lost.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
