3957: Cease mowing on grassland to allow early succession
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Some grassland butterfly and moth species, which require generally open habitats, are also dependent on host plant species which are sensitive to disturbance (Eichel & Fartmann 2008), or may themselves suffer decreased juvenile survival from mowing or haying (Dover et al. 2011). The cessation of mowing on grassland, also known as abandoning or fallowing, may enable host plant species to establish (Eichel & Fartmann 2008) or lead to an increase in the survival of juvenile life stages of butterflies and moths (Dover et al. 2011). It may also allow larger, woody plants to establish through succession, which increases habitat complexity, and may enable a more diverse, or different, community of butterflies and moths to establish, at least in the short-term (Bubová et al. 2015).
This action contains studies which compare abandoned grassland to traditionally mown meadows. Note that the effect of mowing cessation may vary depending on the frequency of mowing before abandonment. See also “Cease grazing on grassland to allow early succession”.
For other studies on reducing grassland management, see “Reduce cutting frequency on grassland” and “Reduce management intensity on permanent grasslands (several interventions at once)”. For studies on reversing the process of abandonment, see “Restore or create species-rich, semi-natural grassland”.
Eichel S. & Fartmann T. (2008) Management of calcareous grasslands for Nickerl's fritillary (Melitaea aurelia) has to consider habitat requirements of the immature stages, isolation, and patch area. Journal of Insect Conservation, 12, 677–688.
Dover J.W., Spencer S., Collins S., Hadjigeorgiou I. & Rescia A. (2011) Grassland butterflies and low intensity farming in Europe. Journal of Insect Conservation, 15, 129–137.
Bubová T., Vrabec V., Kulma M. & Nowicki P. (2015) Land management impacts on European butterflies of conservation concern: a review. Journal of Insect Conservation, 19, 805–821.

Key Messages:

Sixteen studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of ceasing mowing on grassland to allow early succession. Three studies were in Germany, two were in each of the USA, Spain and the Czech Republic, and one was in each of Switzerland, Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, Japan, Russia and Italy.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (8 STUDIES)

Community composition (3 studies): Two replicated, site comparison studies in the Czech Republic and Germany found that the community composition of butterflies and moths in grasslands which had been abandoned for &gt;5 years or an unspecified length of time was similar to grasslands managed by mowing or grazing (results not distinguished). One replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in Spain found that after mowing and grazing was abandoned, over 6 years the butterfly community became dominated by generalist species, and species with fewer generations/year.


Richness/diversity (7 studies): Five of seven replicated, site comparison studies in Germany, Poland, Japan, the Czech Republic, Russia and Italy found that grasslands which had been abandoned for 3–13 years, 10–20 years or an unspecified length of time, had a similar species richness of butterflies and burnet moths or all moths to grasslands managed by annual or unspecified frequency mowing, or mown within the last three years (in two studies mowing and grazing were not distinguished). One of these studies also found that grasslands abandoned for more than 50 years had lower species richness than grasslands mowed annually to up to 20 years ago, and another found that grasslands abandoned for 6–13 years had a lower species richness of butterflies than grasslands managed by traditional rotational mowing and burning. One of the studies found that meadows not cut all summer had a higher species richness of butterflies than meadows cut 1–3 times/summer. The other study found that grasslands abandoned for at least 5–20 years had a lower species richness of butterflies than grasslands managed by mowing or grazing (results not distinguished).

POPULATION RESPONSE (14 STUDIES)

Abundance (14 studies): Four replicated studies (including one randomized, paired, controlled study and three site comparison studies) in Germany, Spain, Slovakia and Hungary found that grasslands which had been abandoned for &gt;1–20 years had a lower abundance of all butterflies or some species of butterfly and caterpillars, than grasslands managed by mowing once or twice per year (in two studies mowing and grazing were not distinguished). Four replicated, site comparison studies (including one paired study) in Germany, the Czech Republic, Russia and Italy found that grasslands which had been abandoned for &gt;3 years, were temporarily abandoned, or were uncut all summer, had a higher abundance of all butterflies, 11 species of butterfly, Scotch argus adults and meadow neb moth caterpillars, than grasslands managed by mowing annually, 1–3 times/summer, or within the last three years. Two replicated studies (including one controlled, before-and-after study and one site comparison study) in Spain and Germany found that grasslands which had been abandoned for 1–6 years or an unspecified time period had a higher abundance of woodland and hedgerow butterflies and burnet moths, but a lower abundance of grassland or farmland species, than grasslands managed by mowing and/or grazing (results not distinguished). One of these studies also found that silver-studded blue went extinct in some abandoned meadows. Three replicated, site comparison studies in the USA and Poland found that in grasslands which had been abandoned for many years or 10 to over 50 years before abundance was mixed depending on butterfly species compared to grasslands managed by grazing or mowing. One replicated, site comparison study in Switzerland found that grasslands which had been abandoned for around six years had a similar abundance of heath fritillary adults and caterpillars to grasslands managed by annual mowing, but that grasslands abandoned for &gt;25 years had a lower abundance of adults and no caterpillars.

BEHAVIOUR (2 STUDIES)

Use (2 studies): One replicated, paired, site comparison study in Germany found that grassland which had been abandoned for &gt;5 years had a similar occurrence of hoary bell moth caterpillars to grassland managed by mowing. One replicated, site comparison study in Spain found that grizzled skipper and painted lady occurred less frequently, but small pearl-bordered fritillary occurred more frequently, in meadows which had been abandoned for at least 1–2 years than in meadows managed by mowing or grazing (results not distinguished).


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
