1796: Legally protect peatlands
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Peatland habitats might be protected by law. Specific sites may be purchased or designated as protected areas in order to limit damaging activities like trampling, vehicle use, extraction of resources and development. Protected sites may be left alone or, where necessary, actively managed/restored to increase their value. This section considers the overall effects of legally protecting specific areas. Effects of individual interventions performed within protected areas are also considered as separate actions.
Assessing the effectiveness of protected areas is particularly difficult. For example, protected and unprotected areas might start off with different quality habitats (protection being granted to the best quality peatlands). Protected areas are also more likely to be in remote areas, so less accessible to threats such as harvesting (Joppa & Pfaff 2009). Finally, effectiveness is best monitored over long timescales, but this increases the chance that other factors influence the ecosystem. The most reliable studies would compare protected and unprotected areas over time, and possibly correct for some of the biases.
Key peatland types for which this action may be appropriate: bogs, fens/fen meadows, tropical peat swamps.
Related actions: create legislation for ‘no net loss’ of wetlands; adopt voluntary codes to protect peatlands.
Joppa L.N. & Pfaff A. (2009) High and far: biases in the location of protected areas. PLoS ONE, 4, e8273.

Key Messages:

Five studies evaluated the effects on peatland habitats of legally protecting them: two of tropical peat swamp forest, two of unspecified peatlands and one of a bog.
Peatland habitat (3 studies): Two studies in Indonesia reported that peat swamp forest was lost from within the boundaries of national parks. However, one of these studies was a site comparison and reported that forest loss was greater outside the national park. One before-and-after study of peatlands in China reported that peatland area initially decreased, but then increased, following legal protection.
Plant community composition (1 study): One before-and-after study in a bog in Denmark reported that the plant community compositon changed over 161 years of protection. In particular, woody plants became more abundant.
Vegetation cover (1 study): One site comparison study in a peatland in Chile found that a protected area had greater vegetation cover (total, herbs and shrubs) than an adjacent grazed and moss-harvested area.
Overall plant richness/diversity (2 studies): One before-and-after study in Denmark reported that the number of plant species in a protected bog fluctuated over time, with no clear trend. One site comparison study in a peatland in Chile found that a protected area had lower plant richness and diversity (but also fewer non-native species) than an adjacent grazed and harvested area.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
