2690: Reduce the duration of exposure to air of captured fish before release
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
In all types of fishing activity, fish are exposed to the air when the fishing gear they have been captured with is retrieved from the water. In commercial fisheries, the duration of air exposure can vary widely and depends on fishing method, the amount and type of catch and the processes used to sort it. When fish leave the water the surface area of their gills is drastically reduced and oxygen uptake into the bloodstream virtually stops (Ferguson & Tufts 1992). They are likely to suffer external injury as well as internal damage as a response to the acute stress. A fish will ultimately die if left out of water. However, some fish species are more tolerant to exposure than others and can survive for a relatively long time in air. Reducing the length of time fish are exposed to air before being returned to the water may influence survival by reducing physical injury and damage caused by lack of oxygen. Normal gill function returns when live fish are returned to water.
For related interventions, see ‘Handling of catch’.
Ferguson R.A. & Tufts B.L. (1992) Physiological Effects of Brief Air Exposure in Exhaustively Exercised Rainbow Trout (Oncorhynus mykiss): Implications for “Catch and Release” Fisheries. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 49, 1157–1162.

Key Messages:

Three studies examined the effect of reducing the duration of exposure of fish to air on marine fish populations. One study was in each of the Bay of Biscay (Spain), Gulf of Alaska (Canada) and Coral Sea (Australia). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Survival (1 study): One replicated study in the Bay of Biscay found that reducing air exposure before release did not increase the survival of small-spotted catshark caught during commercial trawling.


Condition (1 study): One replicated study in the Gulf of Alaska found that shorter durations of air exposure before release improved the physical condition and reduced the amount of injury to discarded chum salmon caught in purse seine nets. 

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Behaviour change (1 study): One study in the Coral Sea found that minimal exposure to air and handling resulted in improved overall behaviour after release (activity and ability to return to reef) of reef fish, compared to fish exposed to air and handling for longer duration.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
