2684: Deploy fishing gear at selected times (day/night) to avoid unwanted species
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Many marine species undertake daily vertical migrations through the water column during day/night cycles, influenced by factors such as temperature, light levels, and prey availability. Some shark species, for example, swim closer to the sea surface at night than during the day (Bromhead et al. 2012). There is also evidence that in sufficient levels of light some fish are better able to detect, and thus better avoid, approaching trawl gear (Glass & Wardle 1989) or escape from parts of the net after entering it (Gabr et al. 2007). The timing of setting and hauling gear can, therefore, affect catch rates (Gilman et al. 2008), so fishing at a specific time of day/night may help to avoid unwanted or threatened fish species whose distribution or behaviour decreases the likelihood of capture.
Evidence for similar interventions is summarized under ‘Deployment of fishing gear and mode of operation - Deploy fishing gear at selected depths to avoid unwanted species’ and ‘Selectively avoid unwanted fish based on temperature distribution’.
Bromhead D., Clarke S., Hoyle S., Muller B., Sharples P. & Harley S. (2012) Identification of factors influencing shark catch and mortality in the Marshall Islands tuna longline fishery and management implications. Journal of Fish Biology, 80, 1870–1894.
Gabr M., Fujimori Y., Shimizu S. & Miura T. (2007) Behaviour analysis of undersized fish escaping through square meshes and separating grids in simulated trawling experiment. Fisheries Research, 85, 112–121.
Gilman E., Clarke S., Brothers N., Alfaro-Shigueto J., Mandelman J., Mangel J., Petersen S., Piovano S., Thomson N., Dalzell P., Donoso M., Goren M. & Werner T. (2008) Shark interactions in pelagic longline fisheries. Marine Policy, 32, 1–18.
Glass C.W. & Wardle C.S. (1989) Comparison of the reactions of fish to a trawl gear, at high and low light intensities. Fisheries Research, 7, 249–266.

Key Messages:

Two studies examined the effect of deploying fishing gear at selected times on marine fish populations. Both studies were in the South Pacific Ocean (Lake Wooloweyah, Australia). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (2 STUDIES)  

Reduction of unwanted catch (2 studies): One of two replicated, controlled studies in the South Pacific Ocean found that trawling for prawns during the day reduced the overall catch of unwanted fish by number, but not weight, compared to usual night trawling, and the effect differed by species. The other study found that powered handlining in the day avoided catches of Harrison’s dogfish at shallower, but not deeper seamounts, compared to the night.

 
 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
