2104: Establish territorial user rights for fisheries
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Fishing can impact subtidal benthic invertebrates through species removal or habitat damage from fishing gear coming into contact with the seabed (Collie et al. 2000). Territorial user rights are area-based fishing rights which allocate secure, exclusive access to fish in a specified area to groups or individuals (Raemaekers et al. 2011). These territorial user rights often have controls on fishing mortality, and fishers are held accountable to comply with these controls. By regulating and limiting fishing effort, establishing territorial user rights can reduce the impact on the seabed, the amount of bycatch, and overall threat to subtidal benthic invertebrates (Gelcich & Donlan 2015; Manríquez & Castilla 2001). Evidence for related interventions is summarised under “Habitat protection – Establish community-based fisheries management”.
 
Collie J.S., Hall S.J., Kaiser M.J. & Poiner I.R. (2000) A quantitative analysis of fishing impacts on shelf‐sea benthos. Journal of Animal Ecology, 69, 785–798.
Gelcich S. & Donlan C.J. (2015) Incentivizing biodiversity conservation in artisanal fishing communities through territorial user rights and business model innovation. Conservation Biology, 29, 1076–1085.
Manríquez P.H. & Castilla J.C. (2001) Significance of marine protected areas in central Chile as seeding grounds for the gastropod Concholepas concholepas. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 215, 201–211.
Raemaekers S., Hauck M., Bürgener M., Mackenzie A., Maharaj G., Plagányi É.E. & Britz P.J. (2011) Review of the causes of the rise of the illegal South African abalone fishery and consequent closure of the rights-based fishery. Ocean & Coastal Management, 54, 433–445.

Key Messages:

One study examined the effects of establishing territorial user rights for fisheries on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations. The study was in the South Pacific Ocean (Chile).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Mollusc reproductive success (1 study): One site comparison study in South Pacific Ocean found that an area with territorial user rights for fisheries had larger-sized and more numerous egg capsules, and more larvae of the Chilean abalone up to 21 months after establishing fishing restrictions compared to an open-access area.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
