2667: Cease or prohibit all commercial fishing
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Commercial fishing is extraction of marine organisms by any method for sale and profit. It is one of the most widespread human activities in our seas and oceans, and its biggest direct impact on fish is the potential removal of huge quantities of target fish species over large areas. Commercial fishing is done with nearly every gear type, many of which are not highly selective, catching unwanted fish that cannot be sold and so are returned to the sea, often dead or with reduced survival prospects (Benoit et al. 2013; Depestele et al. 2014). If left uncontrolled, commercial fishing can cause depletions, or even total collapse, of entire fish populations (Hutchings & Reynolds 2004; Dickey-Collas et al. 2010). Ceasing or banning all commercial fishing in an area can significantly reduce the overall fishing pressure to levels that should allow commercially targeted fish populations to recover from over-fishing or to maintain existing healthy levels. Prohibiting commercial fishing types may also indirectly benefit non-commercially targeted fish species by reducing disturbance and damage to habitats by the gears used. This intervention is often, but not always, implemented in marine protected areas.
Evidence for similar interventions relating to the ceasing or prohibiting of commercial fishing activity by different gear types is summarized throughout the ‘Spatial and Temporal Management’ section.
Benoit H.P., Plante S., Kroiz M. & Hurlbut T. (2013) A comparative analysis of marine fish species susceptibilities to discard mortality: effects of environmental factors, individual traits, and phylogeny. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 70, 99–113.
Depestele J., Desender M., Benoit H.P., Polet H. & Vincx M. (2014) Short-term survival of discarded target fish and non-target invertebrate species in the "eurocutter" beam trawl fishery of the southern North Sea. Fisheries Research, 154, 82–92.
Dickey-Collas M., Nash R.D.M., Brunel T., van Damme C.J.G., Marshall C.T., Payne M.R., Corten A., Geffen A.J., Peck M.A., Hatfield E.M.C., Hintzen N.T., Enberg K., Kell L.T. & Simmonds E.J. (2010) Lessons learned from stock collapse and recovery of North Sea herring: a review. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 67, 1875–1886.
Hutchings J.A. & Reynolds J.D. (2004) Marine Fish Population Collapses: Consequences for Recovery and Extinction Risk. BioScience, 54, 297–309.

Key Messages:

Eight studies examined the effects of ceasing or prohibiting all commercial fishing in an area on marine fish populations. Two studies were in the Tasman Sea (Australia), and one was in each of the Indian Ocean (Australia), the Mediterranean Sea (Spain), the Greenland Sea (Iceland), the Gulf of Mexico (USA), the South China Sea (China) and the South Atlantic Ocean (South Africa).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Community composition (3 studies): Two before-and-after studies (one site comparison) in the Tasman Sea and South China Sea found that the fish assemblage/species composition was different before and after prohibiting all commercial fishing, in an estuary after two years, and in the nearby wider region surrounding two marine reserves five years after their creation. One site comparison study in the South Atlantic Ocean found no change in species composition between a reserve closed to all commercial fishing for 40 years and unprotected fished areas.
Richness/diversity (2 studies): One site comparison study in the South Atlantic Ocean found no difference in overall fish diversity between a protected area closed to all commercial fishing for 40 years compared to unprotected fished areas. One before-and-after study in the South China Sea found that fish species richness decreased in the wider region five years after all commercial fishing was banned in two marine reserves.

POPULATION RESPONSE (7 STUDIES)

Abundance (7 studies): Two of four site comparison studies (one replicated, one before-and-after) in the Mediterranean Sea, Indian Ocean, south Atlantic Ocean and the Gulf of Mexico found that in protected areas prohibiting all commercial fishing for five years and 40 years there were higher abundances of three of 12 commercially targeted and non-targeted fish species/groups and one of four commercially targeted fish species, compared to unprotected fished areas. One study found mixed effects on fish densities 30–40 years after banning all commercial fishing, varying with level of commercial exploitation, and higher abundances of five of five commercially exploited species. The other study found there was no increase in white seabream and gilthead bream biomass 2–13 years after closure compared to an unprotected fished area, but it was lower than a no-take area protected for over nine years. One before-and-after, site comparison study in the Tasman Sea found that most fish species in an estuary in a marine reserve had a lower abundance two years after it was closed to all commercial fishing than before, as did one of two reference sites in unprotected adjacent estuaries. One before-and-after study in the South China Sea found that in the five years after the creation of two marine reserves with limits on commercial fishing activity, overall fish density in the nearby wider region increased. One replicated, site comparison study in the Tasman Sea found that in areas of a marine reserve closed to commercial trapping, fish abundance varied over 10 years and was higher for some groups than others compared to reserve sites open to trapping.
Condition (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the Indian Ocean found that in marine reserve areas banning all commercial fishing for five years, overall fish size was bigger compared to fished areas.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Use (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the Greenland Sea found that areas closed to commercial fishing (trawling) had higher recaptures of tagged smaller immature cod than adult cod over time compared to trawled areas, indicating they were more likely to have an increased protection from fishing.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
