878: Restore ponds
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Ponds are often drained, left to dry or degraded during the development of agriculture or expansion of urban areas or other land uses. Although some amphibians are relatively tolerant of poor pond conditions, breeding is likely to be more successful in better quality ponds. Restoration of ponds may therefore help to increase populations of amphibians.
Studies included here investigated the restoration of ponds using a combination of interventions. Studies that investigated pond restoration using one specific action are discussed under the relevant intervention, i.e. ‘Deepen, de-silt or re-profile ponds’, ‘Add specific plants to aquatic habitats’, ‘Remove specific aquatic plants’ and ‘Remove canopy to reduce pond shading’. For removal or control of fish populations see ‘Threat: Invasive alien and other problematic species – Reduce predation by other species’.
Studies investigating the restoration of wetlands are discussed in ‘Restore wetlands’.
 

Key Messages:

Fifteen studies investigated the effectiveness of pond restoration for amphibians.
One replicated, before-and-after study in Denmark found that pond restoration had mixed effects on European tree frog population numbers depending on site. One replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in the UK found that pond restoration did not increase great crested newt populations. Six replicated, before-and-after studies (including one controlled and one site comparison study) in Denmark, Estonia, Italy and the UK found that pond restoration and creation increased numbers of amphibian species, maintained or increased populations, or increased pond occupancy and ponds with breeding success. One found that numbers of species did not increase. Two before-and-after studies (including one replicated study) in Estonia found that pond restoration, along with terrestrial habitat management, maintained or increased populations of natterjack toads. One systematic review in the UK found that there was no conclusive evidence that mitigation, which often included pond restoration, resulted in self-sustaining great crested newt populations.
One small, replicated study in the USA found that pond restoration had mixed effects on spotted salamander hatching success depending on restoration method.
One replicated, before-and-after study in the UK found that restoration increased the number of ponds used by breeding natterjack toads. One replicated study in Sweden found that following restoration green toads only reproduced in one of 10 ponds. Three before-and-after studies (including one replicated, controlled study) in Denmark and Italy found that restored and created ponds were colonized by 1–7 species, with 6–65% of ponds colonized and 35% used for breeding.

 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Amphibian Conservation
Description: Amphibian Synopsis
