175: Provide or retain set-aside areas in farmland
Effectiveness rating: Beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Allocation of some farmland to ‘set-aside’ (fields taken out of production) was compulsory under European agricultural policy from 1992 until 2008. Originally intended as a method of reducing production, set-aside has also been promoted as a way of protecting on-field biodiversity. Set-aside fields can be sown with fallow crops or left to naturally regenerate. Set-aside can be rotational (in a different place every year) or long term (retained for 5–20 years).
A 2008 literature review of the Environmental Stewardship programme, particularly Entry Level Stewardship (ELS) in the UK (Vickery et al. 2008) found that the population trends of all Farmland Bird Index species were positively correlated with the availability of set-aside in that year and that Entry Level Stewardship may not be able to effectively replace set-aside.
Vickery, J., Chamberlain, D., Evans, A., Ewing, S., Boatman, N., Pietravalle, S., Norris, K. & Butler, S. (2008) Predicting the impact of future agricultural change and uptake of Entry Level Stewardship on farmland birds. British Trust for Ornithology, The Nunnery, Thetford.
 

Key Messages:

Three replicated studies and a review of five studies from Europe and North America examining species richness or diversity found that more species were found on set-aside than on crops. One found fewer species on set-aside than other agricultural habitats.
All 21 studies, including a systematic review, 12 replicated experiments and two reviews, from Europe and North America that investigated population trends or habitat associations found that some species were found at higher densities or used set-aside more than other habitats, or were found on set-aside. Four studies (three replicated) from the UK found that some species were found at lower densities on set-aside compared to other habitats.
Three of four replicated studies from the UK found that waders and Eurasian skylarks had higher productivities on set-aside, compared to other habitats. One study found that skylarks nesting on set-aside had lower productivity compared to those on cereal crops, and similar productivities to those on other crops.
One replicated paired study from the UK found that rotational set-aside was used more than non-rotational set-aside, a replicated paired study found no differences between rotational and non-rotational set-aside. A review from Europe and North America found that naturally regenerated set-aside held more birds and more species than sown set-aside.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Bird Conservation
Description: Bird Synopsis
