2225: Designate a Marine Protected Area and prohibit commercial fishing
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Commercial fishing can impact subtidal benthic invertebrates through species removal or habitat damage from fishing gear entering in contact with the seabed (Collie et al. 2000). Specific areas can be designated as protected, and specific management measures taken to control for impactful activities, such as commercial fishing (Villamor & Becerro 2012). Inside protected areas where commercial fishing is prohibited, the threat from commercial fishing to subtidal benthic invertebrates is removed, and previously impacted populations are, in theory, able to recover over time (Ley‐Cooper et al. 2014). However, species and populations are still subjected to the effects of other fishing activities that are allowed (for instance recreational fishing).
When this intervention occurred outside of a marine protected area, evidence has been summarised under “Threat: Biological resource use – Cease or prohibit commercial fishing”. Evidence for interventions related to recreational fishing is summarised under “Threat: Human intrusions and disturbances”. Evidence for other interventions related to fisheries restrictions within marine protected areas is summarised under “Habitat protection”.
 
Collie J.S., Hall S.J., Kaiser M.J. & Poiner I.R. (2000) A quantitative analysis of fishing impacts on shelf‐sea benthos. Journal of Animal Ecology, 69, 785–798.
Ley‐Cooper K., De Lestang S., Phillips B.F. & Lozano‐Álvarez E. (2014) An unfished area enhances a spiny lobster, Panulirus argus, fishery: implications for management and conservation within a Biosphere Reserve in the Mexican Caribbean. Fisheries Management and Ecology, 21, 264–274.
Villamor A. & Becerro M.A. (2012) Species, trophic, and functional diversity in marine protected and non-protected areas. Journal of Sea Research, 73, 109–116.

Key Messages:

Three studies examined the effects of prohibiting commercial fishing in marine protected areas on subtidal benthic invertebrates. Two studies were in the South Pacific Ocean (New Zealand), and one in the Caribbean Sea (Mexico).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Crustacean abundance (2 studies): Two replicated studies (one before-and-after, one site comparison) in the South Pacific Ocean found that after implementing a marine park prohibiting commercial fishing but allowing the recreational harvest of lobsters, lobster abundance inside the park did not increase over the 12 years after implementation, and abundance was similar inside the park and outside where fishing occurred.
Crustacean condition (3 studies): One replicated, before-and-after study in the South Pacific Ocean found that over the 12 years after implementing a marine park prohibiting commercial fishing but allowing the recreational harvest of lobsters, the biomass of legal-size lobsters inside the park did not increase. One of two site comparison studies (one replicated) in the South Pacific Ocean and the Caribbean Sea found bigger lobsters in an area closed to commercial fishing for an unspecified amount of time compared to a fished area. The second study found that 10 years after implementing a marine park prohibiting commercial fishing but allowing the recreational harvest of lobsters, lobster size was similar inside the park and outside where fishing occurred.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Crustacean behaviour (1 study): One site comparison study in the Caribbean Sea found that 80% of the lobster population occurring in a protected area (year of designation unspecified) where commercial fishing was prohibited remained in the unfished area, and thus remained protected.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
