3244: Add below-ground organic matter: brackish/salt marshes
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
This action involves adding organic matter (i.e. remains or waste products of living organisms) below the ground surface, for example by mixing it into the sediment or placing it into holes. Specific substances than can be used include compost, sewage sludge, wood chips and seaweed extract.
The soil organic matter content of wetland soils may be reduced by disturbance. For example, drainage allows oxygen into the soil, whilst reprofiling removes surface layers rich in organic matter (Bruland et al. 2006). Organic matter can be an important component of wetland soils. It directly supplies nutrients to growing plants, supplies carbon and energy to soil organisms, helps bind the soil together, retains water during dry periods, and mediates soil temperature (Donahue et al. 1983; Weil & Brady 2016). Adding carbon-rich organic materials can indirectly modify nutrient availability by stimulating microbial activity, and so could help to manage invasive species where they benefit from an excess of certain nutrients (Reever Morghan & Seastedt 1999; Tilman et al. 1999; Perry et al. 2004).
To be summarized as evidence for this action, studies must evaluate the effects of adding organic matter without adding living vegetation. The organic matter should be used to help or manage existing vegetation, such as remnant patches of vegetation, or seedlings that germinate from seeds already present.
Related actions: Add surface mulch; Add below-ground organic matter to complement planting.
Bruland G.L., Richardson C.J. & Whalen S.C. (2006) Spatial variability of denitrification potential and related soil properties in created, restored, and paired natural wetlands. Wetlands, 26, 1042–1056.
Donahue R.L., Shickluna J.C. & Robertson L.S. (1983) Soils: An Introduction to Soils and Plant Growth, Fifth Edition. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA.
Perry L.G., Galatowitsch S.M. & Rosen C.J. (2004) Competitive control of invasive vegetation: a native wetland sedge suppresses Phalaris arundinacea in carbon-enriched soil. Journal of Applied Ecology, 41, 151–162.
Reever Morghan K.J. & Seastedt T.R. (1999) Effects of soil nitrogen reduction on nonnative plants in restored grasslands. Restoration Ecology, 7, 51–55.
Tilman E.A., Tilman D., Crawley M.J. & Johnston A.E. (1999) Biological weed control via nutrient competition: potassium limitation of dandelions. Ecological Applications, 9, 103–111.
Weil R.R. & Brady N.C. (2016) The Nature and Properties of Soils, Fifteenth Edition. Pearson, USA.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of adding below-ground organic matter to restore or create brackish/salt marshes. The study was in the USA.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Individual species abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled, before-and-after study in a salt marsh in the USA found that plots amended with alginate contained a greater density of smooth cordgrass Spartina alterniflora than unamended plots after 6–52 weeks. However, amended and unamended plots contained similar smooth cordgrass biomass when it was sampled after 52 weeks.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled, before-and-after study in a salt marsh in the USA found that amending plots with alginate had no significant effect on smooth cordgrass height in the first 16 weeks after intervention, but that amended plots contained taller smooth cordgrass than unamended plots after 28–52 weeks.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
