3753: Breed reptiles in captivity: Snakes – Vipers
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Captive breeding involves taking wild animals into captivity and establishing and maintaining breeding populations. It tends to be undertaken when wild populations become very small or fragmented or when they are declining rapidly. Captive populations can be maintained while threats in the wild are reduced or removed and can provide an insurance policy against catastrophe in the wild. Captive breeding also potentially provides a method of increasing reproductive output beyond what would be possible in the wild. However, captive breeding can result in problems associated with inbreeding depression, removal of natural selection and adaptation to captive conditions. The aim is usually to release captive-bred animals back to natural habitats, either to original sites once conditions are suitable, to reintroduce species to sites that were occupied in the past or to introduce species to new sites. Some captive populations may also be used for research to benefit wild populations.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians. See here for other species groups.
For studies that investigate the effectiveness of releasing captive-bred reptiles see Release captive-bred reptiles into the wild.

Key Messages:

Thirteen studies evaluated the effects of breeding vipers in captivity. Nine studies were in the USA, three were in unknown locations and one was in Columbia.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (13 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (13 studies): Thirteen studies in the USA, Columbia and unknown locations reported that 1–4 female vipers, including three captive-bred offsping, produced litters of 1–18 live young or clutches of 1–26 eggs with hatching success of 63–81%. One study also reported that none of three Chocoan bushmaster eggs that were removed and incubated artificially fully developed.
Survival (5 studies): Three studies in the USA and one in an unknown location reported that of 10–49 captive-bred young snakes, 1–9 died soon after birth or within three months. One study also reported that one pair of adult adders died shortly after arriving in captivity. One study in an unknown location reported that four captive-bred Radde’s vipers survived for at least eight months
Condition (1 study): One study in an unknown location reported that two of 10 captive-bred Nikolsky's adders had some physical deformities.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (2 STUDIES)

Offspring sex ratio (2 studies): Two studies in the USA and an unknown location reported that the sex ratio of captive-bred lower California rattlesnakes was 2:12 and Russell's vipers was 8:6 females to males.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
