695: Leave overwinter stubbles
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This intervention involves leaving crop stubbles in fields until at least February-March. These stubbles may provide an important food source for seed-eating birds over the winter (Campaign for the Farmed Environment 2011).
The availability and extent of overwinter stubbles may have an important influence on bird populations. One study from the UK (Gillings et al. 2005) showed that national population trends of 16 out of 26 bird species were positively influenced by the presence of overwinter stubbles. The same study also predicted that yellowhammer Emberiza citrinella and Eurasian skylark Alauda arvensis population declines would be lessened in areas with a high proportion of stubbles and that 10-year population stability/growth could be achieved by increasing the coverage of stubbles within 1 km squares to 15 ha or 20 ha respectively. Additionally, a 2008 literature review and analysis of the Environmental Stewardship scheme, particularly Entry Level Stewardship in the UK (Vickery et al. 2008), suggested that, for Eurasian skylark, approximately 0.1 km2 of stubble/km2 would be needed to prevent population declines. The authors also suggest that having these patches over 1 km apart would maximize winter use.
Gillings S., Newson S.E., Noble D.G. & Vickery J.A. (2005) Winter availability of cereal stubbles attracts farmland birds and positively influences breeding population trends. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 272, 733-739.
Vickery J., Chamberlain D., Evans A., Ewing S., Boatman N., Pietravalle S., Norris K. & Butler S. (2008) Predicting the impact of future agricultural change and uptake of Entry Level Stewardship on farmland birds. British Trust for Ornithology, The Nunnery, Thetford.
Campaign for the Farmed Environment (2011) Guide to voluntary measures 2011 edition. Campaign for the Farmed Environment, Warwickshire.

Key Messages:

Eighteen studies (including four reviews and one systematic review) investigated the effects of overwinter stubbles on farmland wildlife. Thirteen studies from Finland, Switzerland and the UK (six replicated trials, including two site comparisons, four reviews and a systematic review) found evidence that leaving overwinter stubbles provides some benefits to plants, insects, spiders, mammals and farmland birds. These benefits include higher densities of farmland birds in winter, increased grey partridge productivity, and increased cirl bunting population size (in combination with several other conservation measures) and territory density. 
One replicated site comparison study from the UK found evidence that leaving overwinter stubbles had inconsistent or no effects on farmland bird numbers. Three studies found only certain bird species showed positive associations with overwinter stubbles. Two replicated studies (of which one also randomized and controlled) found that only Eurasian skylark or both Eurasian skylark and Eurasian linnet benefited, out of a total 23 and 12 farmland bird species tested respectively. One study found that only grey partridge and tree sparrow showed positive population responses to areas with overwinter stubbles.
Two studies from the UK (one randomized, one replicated and controlled) found that different farmland bird species benefited from different stubble heights. One replicated site comparison found mixed effects between different stubble management options on seed-eating bird abundance.

 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Farmland Conservation
Description: Farmland Synopsis
