3352: Apply root dip to non-woody plants before planting: brackish/saline wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Before planting marsh or swamp plants, the roots could be dipped in a substance to retain moisture (e.g. mud or water-retaining gels) or stimulate growth (e.g. plant hormones). These dips may improve survival and/or growth of the planted vegetation. This action does not include root dips involving fungi.
To be summarized as evidence for this action, studies must have explicitly compared the performance of treated and untreated plants. Studies that simply report the performance of treated plants are not summarized here. Studies do not have to be in flooded/saturated soils, as long as they involve wetland-characteristic species.
Related actions: Add root-associated fungi to plants before planting, including via a root dip.
Baskin C.C. & Baskin J.M. (2014) Seeds: Ecology, Biogeography and Evolution of Dormancy and Germination, Second Edition. Academic Press.
Small C.C. & Degenhardt D. (2018) Plant growth regulators for enhancing revegetation success in reclamation: a review. Ecological Engineering, 118, 43–51.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects – on emergent, non-woody plants typical of brackish/saline wetlands – of applying a non-fungal root dip before planting. The study was in the USA.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Individual species abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study on mudflats in the USA found that root-dipping smooth cordgrass Spartina alterniflora before planting had mixed effects on cordgrass density after 1–2 growing seasons, but never increased it.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study on mudflats in the USA found that root-dipping smooth cordgrass Spartina alterniflora before planting had mixed effects on cordgrass height after two growing seasons.

OTHER

Survival (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study on mudflats in the USA found that root-dipped smooth cordgrass Spartina alterniflora plants typically had a lower survival rate, after one growing season, than plants that had not been root-dipped.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
