2121: Hand harvest instead of using a dredge
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Dredging, for instance for bivalves, normally involves towing a heavy steel frame along the seabed, which negatively impacts subtidal benthic invertebrates due to direct physical damage, and changes to the seabed structure and topography (Currie & Parry 1996).  Hand harvesting, (for instance using hand-pushed rakes, hand-dredge, dip nets, harvesting-knife, or direct manual harvesting) instead of dredging can have fewer negative impacts on subtidal benthic invertebrates and the surrounding seabed (Bishop et al. 2005; Leitão & Gaspar 2007; Narvarte et al. 2011).
 
Bishop M., Peterson C.H., Summerson H.C. & Gaskill D. (2005) Effects of harvesting methods on sustainability of a bay scallop fishery: dredging uproots seagrass and displaces recruits. Fishery Bulletin, 103, 712–719.
Currie D.R. & Parry G.D. (1996) Effects of scallop dredging on a soft sediment community: a large-scale experimental study. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 134, 131–150.
Leitão F.M.S. & Gaspar M.B. (2007) Immediate effect of intertidal non-mechanised cockle harvesting on macrobenthic communities: a comparative study. Scientia Marina, 71, 723–733.
Narvarte M. González R. Medina A. & Avaca M.S. (2011) Artisanal dredges as efficient and rationale harvesting gears in a Patagonian mussel fishery. Fisheries Research, 111, 108–115.

Key Messages:

Two studies examined the effects of hand harvesting instead of using a dredge on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations. Both were in San Matías Gulf, South Atlantic Ocean (Argentina).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Unwanted catch community composition (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in San Matías Gulf found that, when harvesting mussels, the community composition of the unwanted catch was similar by hand harvesting and by using a dredge.
Unwanted catch richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in San Matías Gulf found that, when harvesting mussels, hand harvesting caught fewer species of unwanted catch compared to using a dredge.

POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Unwanted catch abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in San Matías Gulf found that, when harvesting mussels, hand harvesting caught fewer unwanted sea urchins and brittle stars compared to using a dredge.
Unwanted catch condition (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in San Matías Gulf found that, when harvesting mussels, the damage caused to unwanted sea urchins and brittle stars was similar by hand harvesting and by using a dredge.

OTHER 1 STUDY)

Commercial catch abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in San Matías Gulf found that more commercially targeted mussels were caught by hand harvesting than by using a dredge.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
