3390: Engage local people in management/monitoring of marshes or swamps
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Local people may be engaged in a range of marsh and swamp conservation projects, from designing management plans, to carrying out practical management and even monitoring as citizen scientists. Local people may be fundamentally integrated into management (“community-based conservation”) or participate occasionally. They may be volunteers or employees. Projects that actively engage local people could increase awareness of marshes and swamps and their value, increase awareness of rules and regulations, change perceptions, and create a sense of ownership (Danielsen et al. 2003; Evely et al. 2011; Mombo et al. 2013). Local knowledge may also enhance the success of conservation actions.
To be clear, studies would be summarized as evidence for this action if the management or monitoring is substantially related to marshes and swamps, even if it involves other wetland habitats (e.g. peatlands), aquatic habitats (e.g. rivers and lakes) or upland habitats (e.g. forests). The effects of specific interventions carried out by local people are considered elsewhere on this site.
Related actions: Raise public awareness about marshes or swamps.
Danielsen F., Mendoza M.M., Alviola P., Balete D.S., Enghoff M., Poulsen M.K. & Jensen A.E. (2003) Biodiversity monitoring in developing countries: what are we trying to achieve? Oryx, 37, 407–409.
Evely A.C., Pinard M., Reed M.S. & Fazey L. (2011) High levels of participation in conservation projects enhance learning. Conservation Letters, 4, 116–126.
Mombo F., Speelman S., Hella J. & Van Huylenbroeck G. (2013) How characteristics of wetlands resource users and associated institutions influence the sustainable management of wetlands in Tanzania. Land Use Policy, 35, 8–15.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation or human behaviour, of engaging local people in management/monitoring of marshes or swamps. One study was in Senegal and one was in India.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall extent (1 study): One before-and-after study of a coastal wetland in India reported that after implementing a community-based restoration programme, the area of high-quality mangrove forest increased. Meanwhile, the area of degraded mangrove forest decreased.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE
 
VEGETATION STRUCTURE
 
OTHER

Human behaviour (1 study): One before-and-after study of a wetland National Park in Senegal reported that after switching from authoritarian protection to community-based management, fewer fines were issued for illegal activities (including illegal settlement and uncontrolled grazing).


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
