137: Plant crops in spring rather than autumn
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:

This intervention involves planting crops in spring rather than autumn. Changes in farming practice in northern Europe have included a shift from sowing crops in spring to sowing them the preceding autumn/winter. This change is considered to have adversely affected farmland biodiversity including invertebrates and farmland birds (see, for example, Donald & Vickery, 2000).
Donald P. F. & Vickery J. A. (2000) The importance of cereal fields to breeding and wintering skylarks Alauda arvensis in the UK. Pages 140-150 in: N. J. Aebischer, A. D. Evans, P. V. Grice and J. A. Vickery (eds) Ecology and Conservation of Lowland Farmland Birds, British Ornithologists Union, Tring.


Key Messages:

A total of nine studies from Denmark, Sweden and the UK looked at the effects of sowing crops in spring or autumn on farmland wildlife. Five studies (including one replicated controlled trial, and a review) found that planting crops in spring rather than autumn resulted in higher numbers of farmland birds, weed diversity or weed density and one arable weed species produced more fruit on spring-sown crops.
A review found one study from the UK showing that four out of five species of arable weed produced more fruits on autumn-sown crops. A second review found one study showing that there were more invertebrates in winter wheat than spring wheat.
A replicated study from the UK found that winter and spring sown crops were used for different broods by Eurasian skylarks. A replicated site comparison found arthropod abundance was higher in autumn barley in early summer and spring barley in late summer. A replicated, controlled study in Sweden, found that northern lapwings nested on spring-sown crops more than expected based on their availability, but hatching success on spring crops was lower than on autumn crops.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Farmland Conservation
Description: Farmland Synopsis
