2910: Involve fishers and stakeholders in co-management
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Co-management can be defined as a partnership arrangement in which local stakeholders such as fishers or tourist organisations share the responsibility and authority for the management of resources with national or local state bodies. This type of management is thought to be more effective as the stakeholders often have local knowledge and are involved in the decision making and management of the resource (Pomeroy & Rivera 2006). This gives stakeholders a platform to express their views and may lead to improved compliance or uptake of new management plans.
Pomeroy R.S & Rivera-Guieb R. (2006) Fishery Co-Management: A Practical Handbook. CABI Publishing and International Development Research Centre, Wallingford, UK.

Key Messages:

Three studies examined the effect of involving fishers and stakeholders in co-management on marine fish populations. One study was in each of the Indian Ocean, the South China Sea (Vietnam) and the Pacific Ocean (Tonga). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Abundance (1 study): One before-and-after study the Indian Ocean found that involving fishers and stakeholders in co-management increased overall fish abundance, but abundance varied between species groups, nine years after implementation compared to before.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (2 STUDIES)

Reduction of fishing effort (1 study): One before-and-after study in the Pacific Ocean found that in the five years after implementation of a new co-management system there was no decrease in overall fishing effort in the managed area.
Commercial catch abundance (1 study): One before-and-after study in the Pacific Ocean found no increase in total fish catch rates and a decrease in catch rates of half of the six species groups individually inside an area with a new co-management system after five years.
Improved compliance/reduction of illegal fishing activity (1 study): One before-and-after study in the South China Sea reported that after co-management was established in an area there was a decrease in illegal fishing using destructive fishing gears.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
