2429: Use taste-aversion to reduce predation of livestock by mammals to deter human-wildlife conflict
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Wild mammalian predators can cause unacceptable levels of livestock losses. Human-wildlife conflict can be reduced if wild mammals can be effectively deterred from attacking livestock. This intervention covers the use of substances that cause unpleasant effects in mammals, such as gastrointestinal discomfort, but at a dose not intended to cause long-term harm to the animal. Most studies are trials using captive animals, especially coyotes Canis latrans. One study included here is a trial of using the same approach to deter predation of bird eggs. This would most likely find application in poultry or game rearing operations, and so is included here given that the intention could be to reduce economic losses caused by wild mammals. If the intervention is effective at reducing predation, it could reduce incentives for carrying out lethal control of mammalian predators.

Key Messages:

Nine studies evaluated the effects of using taste-aversion to reduce predation of livestock by mammals to deter human-wildlife conflict. Six studies were in the USA, two were in Canada and one was at an unnamed location.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (9 STUDIES)

Human-wildlife conflict (9 studies): Three of seven replicated studies (including three controlled studies), in the USA, Canada and at an unnamed location, found that coyotes killed fewer sheep, rabbits or turkeys after taste-aversion treatment. The other four studies found that taste-aversion treatment did not reduce killing by coyotes of chickens, sheep or rabbits. A replicated, before-and-after study in the USA found that taste-aversion treatment reduced egg predation by mammalian predators whilst a replicated, controlled, paired sites study in the USA found no such effect.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
