3943: Restore or create grassland/savannas 
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
In many parts of the world, vast areas of native grassland have been lost or degraded. Recreating or restoring these grasslands, by re-planting native species, removing invasive, non-native species, or reintroducing disturbance regimes such as grazing, mowing or burning, aims to create the habitat necessary to restore or boost native butterflies and moths, and return communities to those found in remnant, undisturbed grasslands (Denning & Foster 2018, O’Dwyer & Attiwell 2000).
For studies on restoring wet grasslands, fenland and floodplains, see “Restore or create wetlands and floodplains”. For studies on restoring dry heathland and shrubland, see “Restore or create heathland/shrubland”.
This action includes studies where either multiple actions have been used to restore or create grasslands, or where the specific action used is not clear. For studies of specific actions for creating or restoring grasslands, see “Replant native vegetation”, “Change mowing regime on grassland” and “Natural system modifications – Use prescribed fire to maintain or restore disturbance in grasslands or other open habitats”. For studies on restoring species-rich grassland within a farmland context, see “Agriculture and aquaculture – Restore arable land to permanent grassland”, “Agriculture and aquaculture – Restore or create species-rich, semi-natural grassland”, “Agriculture and aquaculture – Reduce grazing intensity on grassland by reducing stocking density”, “Agriculture and aquaculture – Reduce grazing intensity on grassland by seasonal removal of livestock”, “Agriculture and aquaculture – Reduce cutting frequency on grassland” and “Agriculture and aquaculture – Reduce management intensity on permanent grasslands (several interventions at once)”.
Denning K.R. & Foster B.L. (2018) Flower visitor communities are similar on remnant and reconstructed tallgrass prairies despite forb community differences. Restoration Ecology, 26, 751–759.
O’Dwyer C. & Attiwell P.M. (2000) Restoration of a native grassland as habitat for the golden sun moth Synemon plana Walker (Lepidoptera; Castniidae) at Mount Piper, Australia. Restoration Ecology, 8, 170–174.

Key Messages:

Six studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of restoring or creating grassland or savanna. Three studies were in the USA, two were in the UK, and one was in Italy.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, paired, site comparison study in Italy found that created semi-natural grasslands had a greater diversity of butterflies than adjacent conifer forests, but a lower diversity than species-rich pastures.

POPULATION RESPONSE (4 STUDIES)

Abundance (4 studies): Two site comparison studies (including one replicated, paired study) in Italy and the USA found that created semi-natural grasslands and restored grasslands and oak barrens had a higher abundance of butterflies and regal fritillaries than adjacent conifer forests, species-rich pastures or unmanaged or remnant prairies. One site comparison study in the USA found that prairies restored 5–10 years ago by seeding with native species, mowing, and weeding or applying herbicide, had a greater abundance of Fender’s blue eggs than a prairie restored 1–2 years ago, and a similar abundance to remnant prairies. One study in the USA reported that restored prairie supported a translocated population of regal fritillaries for at least three years after restoration.

BEHAVIOUR (3 STUDIES)

Use (2 studies): One of two replicated, before-and-after studies in the UK reported that following grassland restoration the area occupied by small pearl-bordered fritilliaries increased. The other study reported that following grassland restoration the number of marsh fritillary populations at each site remained the same or increased.
Behaviour change (1 study): One site comparison study in the USA found that Fender’s blue butterflies spent a similar proportion of time laying eggs in prairies restored 5–10 years ago by seeding with nectar species, mowing, and weeding or applying herbicide, and in remnant prairies.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
