3005: Change season/timing of vegetation harvest: freshwater marshes
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
The effects of harvesting vegetation – especially on its physical structure at a given time of year – may vary depending on the time of year it is carried out. Caution: In some habitats, regular disturbance such as harvesting may be necessary to maintain the composition and diversity of plant and animal communities.
To be summarized as evidence for this action, studies should have compared a fixed harvest frequency and intensity, but in different seasons (e.g. summer vs winter) or in different temporal patterns (e.g. 50% of plants cut every summer vs 100% of plants cut every other summer).
Related actions: Reduce frequency of vegetation harvest; Reduce intensity of vegetation harvest; Change season/timing of cutting/mowing, including studies where cut vegetation is not removed.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of harvesting vegetation from freshwater marshes in different seasons or at different times. There was one study in Switzerland, one in Belgium and one in Japan.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in wet meadows in Switzerland reported that summer-harvested and winter-harvested plots experienced similar changes in their overall plant community composition, over 3–4 years.
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study of wet grasslands in Belgium reported that the effect of a single harvest between June and November on overall plant species richness depended on the month of harvesting.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study of wet grasslands in Belgium reported that the effect of a single harvest between June and November on overall vegetation abundance (including litter) depended on the month of harvesting.
Individual species abundance (3 studies): All three studies quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. The studies all reported that individual species’ abundances responded differently to harvesting in different seasons. For example, the controlled, before-and-after study in Japan reported that harvesting in June reduced the abundance of common reed Phragmites australis, in the following summer, more than harvesting in July.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Overall structure (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in wet meadows in Switzerland reported that summer-harvested and winter-harvested plots both experienced a shift in vegetation cover towards lower vegetation layers, over 3–4 years.
Diameter/perimeter/area (1 study): The same study reported that summer harvesting and winter harvesting had opposite effects on the diameter of common reed Phragmites australis shoots: they became thinner over four years of summer harvests but thicker over three years of winter harvests.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
