3747: Breed reptiles in captivity: Snakes – Boas and pythons
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Captive breeding involves taking wild animals into captivity and establishing and maintaining breeding populations. It tends to be undertaken when wild populations become very small or fragmented or when they are declining rapidly. Captive populations can be maintained while threats in the wild are reduced or removed and can provide an insurance policy against catastrophe in the wild. Captive breeding also potentially provides a method of increasing reproductive output beyond what would be possible in the wild. However, captive breeding can result in problems associated with inbreeding depression, removal of natural selection and adaptation to captive conditions. The aim is usually to release captive-bred animals back to natural habitats, either to original sites once conditions are suitable, to reintroduce species to sites that were occupied in the past or to introduce species to new sites. Some captive populations may also be used for research to benefit wild populations.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians. See here for other species groups.
For studies that investigate the effectiveness of releasing captive-bred reptiles see Release captive-bred reptiles into the wild.

Key Messages:

Twelve studies evaluated the effects of breeding boas and pythons in captivity. Five studies were in the USA, two were in the UK and one was in each of Jersey, Australia, India an unknown location and one was a global review.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (12 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (11 studies): Five studies in Jersey, the USA and the UK reported that 1–4 female boas produced litters of 3–34 young, though 2–10 young/litter or 38% of young overall were stillborn. One replicated study in the USA reported that a captive breeding programme for ball pythons produced over 5,000 eggs from nearly 800 clutches, with an average hatching success of 81%. Five studies in an unknown location, the USA, Australia, India and the UK reported that female pythons produced clutches of 4–29 eggs, with hatching success of 40–100% or 0–100%.
Survival (5 studies): Five studies in the USA, Australia, India and the UK reported that 2–8 captive-bred python hatchlings survived at least two years or 5–8 months, but seven captive-bred emerald tree boas died within three months of birth.
Condition (1 study): One global review reported on one study on Jamaica boas that found that captive breeding had a negative effect on genetic variation compared to wild populations.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
