133: Restore/create species-rich, semi-natural grassland
Effectiveness rating: Beneficial
Background information and definitions:

The area of species-rich grassland in northwest Europe declined dramatically during the twentieth century in response to agricultural intensification (Walker et al. 2004). Restoring this habitat is a high priority for many conservation groups, and in the UK a number of agri-environment schemes support the restoration or creation of species-rich semi-natural grasslands (Walker et al. 2004). Measures used to restore or create grasslands of high plant diversity such as chalk grasslands and hay meadows include grazing, mowing, sowing and hay spreading.
See also ‘Reduce management intensity on permanent grasslands’ for studies where the endpoint is still an economically viable agricultural grassland, rather than a species-rich grassland with nature conservation as its main objective.
See also ‘Restore or create traditional water meadows’ for studies where the species-rich grassland in question is (or was) either fen meadow, or frequently flooded water meadow.
See also ‘Add yellow rattle seed Rhinanthus minor to hay meadows’ for studies looking at the effects of adding yellow rattle seed to grasslands.
See also ‘Reduce chemical inputs in grassland management’, for studies where the sole intervention has been to reduce or cease chemical inputs, in an attempt to restore plant communities.
Walker K.J., Stevens P.A., Stevens D.P., Mountford J.O., Manchester S.J. & Pywell R.F. (2004) The restoration and re-creation of species-rich lowland grassland on land formerly managed for intensive agriculture in the UK. Biological Conservation, 119, 1-18.


Key Messages:

Twenty-eight studies monitored the effects on wildlife of restoring species-rich grassland. Of these, 20 from Finland, Germany, Lithuania, Sweden, Switzerland and the UK (15 replicated of which eight controlled and three also randomized) found restoring species-rich grassland resulted in higher ground beetle abundance, increased plant species richness, farmland bird abundance, pollinating insect density and diversity and earthworm abundance than other types of grassland, or that restored grasslands had similar abundance and species richness of insects to old traditionally managed sites.
Seven studies from Denmark, Finland, Sweden, Switzerland and the UK (five replicated and controlled, two also randomized) found that efforts to restore species-rich grassland had no clear effect on the species richness or abundance of plants, beetles, or the abundance of butterflies and moths. Three replicated studies from Sweden and the UK (one also controlled and two site comparisons) found that restored grassland had a lower diversity and frequency of certain plant species, and attracted fewer foraging queen bumblebees than continuously grazed or unmanaged grasslands.
We captured 40 studies (including 19 replicated and controlled studies of which six were also randomized, and six reviews) from nine European countries that found ten different techniques used alone or in combinations were effective for restoring species-rich grassland. Effective techniques included: grazing, introducing plant species, hay spreading and mowing.
We found 22 studies from seven European countries that included information on the length of time taken to restore grassland communities (including 16 replicated trials of which nine also controlled and three reviews). Six studies saw positive signs of restoration in less than five years, 11 studies within 10 years and two studies found restoration took more than 10 years. Six studies found limited or slow changes in plant communities following restoration. Two studies from Germany and the UK (one replicated controlled trial) found differences in vegetation between restored and existing species-rich grasslands nine or 60 years after restoration.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Farmland Conservation
Description: Farmland Synopsis
