3661: Protect habitat: All reptiles (excluding sea turtles)
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Legally protecting habitat may reduce its conversion and degradation by humans. This may in turn serve to maintain or slow the decline of the abundance and diversity of reptiles that make use of that habitat.
Assessing the effectiveness of protected areas is particularly difficult. For example, protected and unprotected areas used for comparison might start off with different quality habitats (protection often being granted to the best quality habitat). Protected areas are also more likely to be in remote areas, so less accessible to threats such as harvesting (Joppa & Pfaff 2009). Finally, effectiveness is best monitored over long timescales, but this increases the chance that other factors influence the ecosystem. The most reliable studies would compare similar quality protected and unprotected areas over time, and possibly correct for some of the biases.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group. See here for sea turtles.
Joppa L.N. & Pfaff A. (2009) High and far: biases in the location of protected areas. PLoS ONE, 4, e8273.

Key Messages:

Seventeen studies evaluated the effects of protecting habitat on reptile populations (excluding sea turtles). Four studies were in the USA, two were in each of Australia and Brazil, and one was in each of Canada, Madagascar, South Africa, Spain, Hong Kong, Argentina, the borders of Zambia and Zimbabwe, Pakistan and Mexico.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (5 STUDIES)

Richness/diversity (5 studies): Three of five studies (including two replicated, site comparison studies) in the USA, South Africa, Australia, Pakistan and Mexico found mixed effects of protected areas on reptile species richness and combined reptile and amphibian species richness. The other two studies found that protected areas had higher reptile species richness than unprotected farmland.

POPULATION RESPONSE (16 STUDIES)

Abundance (13 studies): Six of 11 studies (including five replicated, site comparison studies) in the USA, Canada, Hong Kong, Mexico, Australia, South Africa, Argentina, the border of Zambia and Zimbabwe and Pakistan found that protected areas had a higher abundance of reptiles, tortoises, Nile crocodiles and combined reptiles and amphibians than areas with less or no protection. Four studies found mixed effects of protection on the abundance of reptiles and big-headed turtles. The other study found that water bodies in protected areas had fewer eastern long-necked turtles than those in suburban areas. One site comparison study in Brazil found that areas with community-based management of fishing practices, which included protecting river turtle nesting beaches, had more river turtles than areas that did not manage fishing practices. One site comparison study in Madagascar found that the abundance of different sized radiated tortoises in a protected area was more similar to that of an exploited population than to an unexploited population.
Occupancy/range (2 studies): One replicated, site comparison study in Argentina found that Argentine tortoises were found in one of two protected areas and two of three unprotected areas. One before-and-after study in Brazil found that most reptile species were still present 20 years after an area was protected.
Survival (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, site comparison study in the USA found that in areas with greater protections, survival of Agassiz’s desert tortoises was higher than in areas with less protections. One replicated, site comparison study in Spain found that roads running through protected areas had more reptile road deaths than roads in unprotected areas.
Condition (4 studies): Two of three site comparison studies (including one replicated study) in the USA, Australia and Hong Kong found that protected areas had larger red-eared sliders and big-headed turtles compared to areas where harvesting was allowed or was thought to be occurring illegally. The other study found that eastern long-necked turtles in protected areas grew slower and were smaller than turtles in suburban areas. One site comparison study in Madagascar found that radiated tortoises in a protected area had similar genetic diversity compared to populations outside of the protected area.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Use (1 study): One replicated study in the USA found that a protected area was used by common chuckwallas.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
