2238: Designate a Marine Protected Area and prohibit the harvesting of sea urchins
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Sea urchins can represent key species within a marine system, with other species crucially depending on their presence to thrive (Coyer et al. 1993; Day & Branch 2002) and to retain balance in the ecosystem (Blamey et al. 2014). Commercial, but also recreational, harvest of edible sea urchins has led to significant ecological changes, not only for sea urchin populations, but also for other species suffering from secondary negative consequences (i.e. a ripple effect; for instance, urchin harvest can negatively affect protected species of abalone; Rogers-Bennett & Pearse 2001). Specific areas can be designated as protected, and specific management measures taken to prohibit the harvest of sea urchins (Béné & Tewfik 2003; Stoner et al. 2012).
Inside protected areas where this activity is prohibited, the threat from sea urchin harvesting to urchin populations and associated communities is removed, and previously impacted populations are, in theory, able to recover over time (Stoner et al. 2012).
When this intervention occurred outside of a marine protected area, evidence for the effects on sea urchin populations is summarised under “Species management – Cease or prohibit the harvest of sea urchin”. Evidence for related interventions is summarised under “Threat: Biological resource use”.
 
Blamey L.K., Plagányi É.E. & Branch G.M. (2014) Was overfishing of predatory fish responsible for a lobster-induced regime shift in the Benguela? Ecological Modelling, 273, 140–150.
Coyer J.A., Ambrose R.F., Engle J.M. & Carroll J.C. (1993) Interactions between corals and algae on a temperate zone rocky reef: mediation by sea urchins. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology, 167, 21–37.
Ceccherelli G., Pinna S. & Sechi N. (2009) Evaluating the effects of protection on Paracentrotus lividus distribution in two contrasting habitats. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science, 81, 59–64.
Day E. & Branch G.M. (2000) Relationships between recruits of abalone Haliotis midae, encrusting corallines and the sea urchin Parechinus angulosus. South African Journal of Marine Science, 22, 137–144.
Rogers‐Bennett L. & Pearse J.S. (2001) Indirect benefits of marine protected areas for juvenile abalone. Conservation Biology, 15, 642–647.
 

Key Messages:

Two studies examined the effects of prohibiting the harvest of sea urchins in marine protected areas on their populations and/or other subtidal benthic invertebrates. Both studies were in the North Pacific Ocean (USA).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Echinoderm abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the North Pacific Ocean found that marine protected areas prohibiting the harvest of red sea urchins had higher adult sea urchin biomass six to 33 years after their designations, compared to harvested areas.
Echinoderm reproductive success (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the North Pacific Ocean found that marine protected areas prohibiting the harvest of red sea urchins had higher urchin population reproductive biomasses, but similar reproductive indices six to 33 years after their designations, compared to harvested areas.
Echinoderm condition (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the North Pacific Ocean found that marine protected areas prohibiting the harvest of red sea urchins had bigger adult sea urchins six to 33 years after their designations, compared to harvested areas.
Mollusc abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the North Pacific Ocean found that marine protected areas prohibiting the harvest of red sea urchins (year of designation unspecified) had more juvenile red abalone and juvenile flat abalone compared to harvested areas, and that juvenile abalone abundance was positively related to sea urchin abundance.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
