3831: Legally protect habitat 
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
The legal protection of important habitat is a commonly used conservation tool, and has been suggested as a major action for threatened butterflies and moths at both national and international level (Patrick 2004, van Swaay & Warren 2006). However, the establishment of reserves specifically for invertebrates, including butterflies and moths, is rare (Douglas 2004). Moreover, legally protected habitat may still need to be well managed, and the protection enforced, in order for the area to conserve populations of threatened butterflies and moths (van Swaay et al. 2012). In addition to the protection of public reserves, private protection of habitat, alongside suitable management, could improve butterfly and moth conservation.
Douglas F. (2004) A dedicated reserve for conservation of two species of Synemon (Lepidoptera: Castniidae) in Australia. Journal of Insect Conservation, 8, 221–228.
Patrick B.H. (2004) Conservation of New Zealand's tussock grassland moth fauna. Journal of Insect Conservation, 8, 199–208.
van Swaay C.A.M. & Warren M.S. (2006) Prime Butterfly Areas of Europe: an initial selection of priority sites for conservation. Journal of Insect Conservation, 10, 5–11.
van Swaay C., Collins S., Dušej G., Maes D., López Munguira M., Rakosy L., Ryrholm N., Šašić M., Settele J., Thomas J.A., Verovnik R., Verstrael T., Warren M., Wiemers M. & Wynhoff I. (2012) Dos and Don’ts for butterflies of the Habitats Directive of the European Union. Nature Conservation, 1, 73–153.

Key Messages:

Ten studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of legally protecting habitat. Six studies were in the UK and one was in each of Australia, Singapore and Ireland and the USA. Three of the studies used data from the same national monitoring scheme across different years.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Richness/diversity (3 studies): One replicated, site comparison study in Singapore found that protected primary or secondary forest reserves had a higher species richness of butterflies than unprotected forest fragments. One replicated, paired, site comparison study in Ireland reported that raised bogs protected as Special Areas of Conservation (where restoration had sometimes taken place) had a similar species richness of moths to unprotected bogs. One replicated, site comparison study in the UK found that, in the first three years after protection as Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), woodland, grassland and heathland sites lost a similar proportion of 29 threatened butterfly species to unprotected sites.

POPULATION RESPONSE (8 STUDIES)

Abundance (7 studies): Three of five site comparison studies (including four replicated studies and one before-and-after study) in the UK and Ireland found that sites protected as National Nature Reserves or Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) (in one case also managed by coppicing), or surrounded by SSSIs, had a higher abundance of heath fritillary, all butterflies and 30/57 species of butterfly than unprotected sites. However, one of these studies only found the result using one of two sets of sites. The other two studies found that grasslands protected as National Nature Reserves or SSSIs and raised bogs protected as Special Areas of Conservation had a similar total abundance of moths, and change in abundance of chalkhill blue butterflies, to unprotected sites. However, one of these studies found mixed results for individual moth species. One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that, at sites with the highest levels of protection, abundances of Karner blue, frosted elfin and Persius duskywing did not change over time, whereas they decreased at sites with lower levels of protection. One replicated, site comparison study in the UK found that protected grasslands assessed as being in “Favourable” habitat condition had worse population trends for 4/8 butterfly species but better for 1/8 species than grasslands in “Unfavourable” condition. One study in Australia reported that after a grassland was designated as a local reserve, populations of golden sun-moth and pale sun-moth persisted for at least four years.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
