3950: Manage wetlands or ponds by grazing or cutting to prevent succession
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Wetlands support a number of specialist butterfly and moth species, but this habitat requires some form of disturbance to prevent succession into scrub or woodland. In natural systems, this may have been provided by seasonal flooding and wild grazing animals, but flooding may not be possible in wetlands constrained by surrounding human land use. Cutting or mowing wetlands, or grazing with domestic livestock, may be able to replace natural disturbance regimes, but the frequency and timing of management may be important for benefitting, or avoiding harm to, particular species.
For studies on the creation or restoration of wetlands by either multiple actions (which may include grazing or cutting) or where the specific action is not clear, see “Restore or create wetlands and floodplains”. For studies on other actions for wetland management and restoration, see “Replant native vegetation” and “Natural system modifications – Use prescribed fire to maintain or restore disturbance in grasslands or other open habitats”.
For studies on the using of grazing and mowing to manage other semi-natural habitats, see “Employ areas of semi-natural habitat for rough grazing (includes salt marsh, lowland heath, bog, fen)”, “Change mowing regime on grassland” and “Manage heathland by cutting”.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of managing wetlands or ponds by grazing or cutting. Two studies were in the Netherlands and one was in Switzerland.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in Switzerland found that fens managed by mowing had a greater species richness of butterflies than fens managed by cattle grazing.

POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the Netherlands found that recently cut fens had fewer large copper eggs than uncut fens.
Survival (2 studies): Two replicated, site comparison studies in the Netherlands found that large copper caterpillar survival was lower in recently cut fens, and fens cut in autumn or winter, than in uncut fens.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
