2673: Cease or prohibit mobile fishing gears that catch bottom (demersal) species and are dragged across the seafloor
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Mobile bottom-towed fishing gears targeting demersal species (mainly various trawl types and some seine nets) are nets that are hauled or actively towed in contact with the seabed, usually from one or more vessels under power (and hence they are a specific subset of general bottom/demersal fishing gears – see related interventions listed below). Towed mobile bottom-contacting gears typically consist of a conical length of net that gradually tapers in size from a wide opening at the front to a closed end section (codend) that collects the catch. Towed bottom-contacting gears can be deployed over large linear distances for extended periods of time and so can catch large quantities of fish, including unwanted sizes and species. Because they are dragged along the seabed essential fish habitats may be damaged along with non-target fish and organisms that fish may feed on. They can also cause sediment disturbance that reduces water quality (Jones 1992). Banning mobile fishing gears that contact the seabed in an area may reduce overall fishing mortality and the damage and disturbance affecting fish and their habitats.
Evidence for similar interventions relating to the use of towed bottom-contacting fishing gears are summarized under ‘Cease or prohibit all (mobile and static) fishing gears that catch bottom (demersal) species’ and ‘Cease or prohibit shellfish dredging’.
Jones J.B. (1992) Environmental impact of trawling on the seabed: a review. New Zealand Journal of Marine and Freshwater Research, 26, 59–67.

Key Messages:

Ten studies examined the effects of ceasing or prohibiting mobile fishing gears that catch bottom (demersal) species and are dragged across the seafloor on marine fish populations. Two studies were in each of the North Atlantic Ocean (Canada, Portugal), the Indian Ocean (Tasmania, Kenya) and the Mediterranean Sea. One study was in each of the North Sea (Denmark), the Arafura Sea (Australia), the Coral Sea (Australia) and the Gulf of Mexico (USA).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (3 STUDIES) 

Richness/diversity (3 studies): Two of three site comparison studies (one replicated and randomized, and one before-and-after) in the North Sea, Indian Ocean and Gulf of Mexico found that the number of fish species, the fish assemblage and overall species richness and diversity (fish and invertebrates combined) varied between areas with different exposures to bottom trawling, and was also dependent on bottom depth and habitat type. The other study reported no effect of closing an area to all towed bottom fishing gears on the species richness of bottom-dwelling fish after 10 years and compared to areas open to trawling.

 POPULATION RESPONSE (8 STUDIES)

Abundance (5 studies): Two of three replicated studies (one controlled and before-and-after, and two site comparison) and one of two before-and-after studies (one site comparison) in the North Sea, Arafura Sea, North Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea found that ceasing or prohibiting fishing with towed bottom gears resulted in higher total fish biomass after 15 years, higher biomass of adult red mullet after 14 years and increased abundances of long-snouted, but not short-snouted, seahorses after one year, compared to openly fished areas. The other two studies found that a ban on towed bottom fishing gears for five and 10 years had no effect on the abundance of bottom-dwelling fish species after closure compared to before, or the abundance and biomass of fish and invertebrate species (combined) compared to areas open to towed gears/trawling.
Reproductive success (2 studies): One of two before-and-after studies (one site comparison) in the North Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea found that after the closure of an area to all bottom-towed fishing gears for 14 years, recruitment of young red mullet had increased. The other study found that an area closed to bottom trawling did not have higher recruitment of young haddock seven years after closure and compared to a trawled area.
Survival (1 study): One before-and-after, site comparison study in the North Atlantic Ocean found that closing an area to bottom trawling did not increase the survival of young haddock seven years after closure, and compared to a trawled area.
Condition (5 studies): One of four replicated studies (two site comparison and one randomized, site comparison) and one before-and-after study in the Arafura Sea, Mediterranean Sea, Gulf of Mexico and the Indian Ocean found that areas prohibiting bottom towed fishing gears had larger sizes of adult red mullet 14 years after closure than before. Two studies found that the effect on fish size of closing areas to towed bottom gears for 3–6 years or areas with no bottom fishing activity varied between individual fish groups and with habitat type, compared to fished areas. The other two found that areas closed to bottom trawling for five years and 15 years had no effect on the overall size of fish and invertebrate species combined or average fish weight, compared to trawled areas.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (2 STUDIES)

Reduce unwanted catch (1 study): One randomized, replicated, site comparison study in the Coral Sea found no reduction in the biomass of non-commercial unwanted catch (fish and invertebrate discard) or in the number of ‘common’ and ‘rare’ discard species in areas closed to trawling for seven years compared to trawled areas.


Catch abundance (1 study): One replicated, before-and-after study in the Indian Ocean found that areas prohibiting beach and all other seine nets for 3–6 years found overall fish catch rates were higher, and catch rates of individual fish groups were variable, compared to unrestricted areas.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
