2932: Breed marine and freshwater mammals in captivity
Effectiveness rating: Trade off between benefit and harms
Background information and definitions:
Captive breeding involves taking wild animals into captivity and establishing and maintaining breeding populations. For conservation purposes, it tends to be undertaken when wild populations become very small or fragmented or when they are declining rapidly. Captive populations can be maintained while threats in the wild are reduced or removed and can provide an insurance policy against catastrophe in the wild. Captive breeding also potentially provides a method of increasing reproductive output beyond what would be possible in the wild. However, captive breeding can result in problems associated with inbreeding depression, removal of natural selection, adaptation to captive conditions and familiarity with humans.
The aim is usually to release captive-bred animals back to natural habitats, either to original sites once conditions are suitable, to reintroduce a species to sites that were previously occupied, or to introduce species to new sites. The studies summarised below evaluated the effects of captive-breeding only. For evidence related to the release of captive-bred mammals, see Release captive-bred marine and freshwater mammals.

Key Messages:

Six studies evaluated the effects of breeding marine and freshwater mammals in captivity. Three studies were in the USA, one study was also in China, Indonesia and Venezuela, and one study was in each of South Africa, Hong Kong and China.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (6 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (2 studies): One study in Hong Kong found that four of six female Indo-Pacific dolphins successfully conceived during a controlled captive breeding programme and gave birth to a total of nine calves. One study in China found that wild-caught Yangtze finless porpoises successfully reproduced in semi-captive conditions.
Survival (4 studies): Two studies in South Africa and the USA found that a captive-born common bottlenose dolphin, and a captive-born and hand-reared common bottlenose dolphin, survived in captivity for at least two and a half years and four years respectively. One review in the USA found that 80% of common bottlenose dolphins born in captivity over two decades survived, and survival increased with improved husbandry techniques. One review in the USA, China, Indonesia and Venezuela found that most captive-born Amazon river dolphins, narrow-ridged finless porpoises and Irrawaddy dolphins did not survive in captivity.
Condition (1 study): One study in China found that a population of Yangtze finless porpoises breeding in semi-captive conditions had low genetic diversity.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Behaviour change (1 study): One study in the USA found that a captive-born and hand-reared common bottlenose dolphin displayed normal behaviour for the species and joined a dolphin social group in captivity.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
