3962: Increase grazing intensity or cutting frequency on grassland
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Although intensive grazing or regular mowing of grasslands is often seen as a threat to butterflies and moths, increasing management intensity can be an important option for controlling dominant plant species and encouraging beneficial plants, such as caterpillar host plants. For example, Goodenough & Sharp (2016) found that increasing autumn and winter grazing intensity led to an increase in the abundance of Primula species, the sole food plant of the Duke of Burgundy Hamearis lucina. Therefore, increasing grazing intensity could, in some cases, be beneficial for butterflies and moths. Alternatively, increased cutting or grazing frequency may be applied to a landscape by the introduction of agri-environment scheme (AES) prescriptions to land previously managed at very low intensity (e.g. Konvicka et al. 2008).
For studies on the effects of reducing management intensity, see “Reduce grazing intensity on grassland by reducing stocking density”, “Reduce grazing intensity on grassland by seasonal removal of livestock”, “Reduce cutting frequency on grassland” and “Reduce management intensity on permanent grasslands (several interventions at once)”.
Goodenough A.E. & Sharp M.H. (2016) Managing calcareous grassland for the declining Duke of Burgundy Hamearis lucina butterfly: effects of grazing management on Primula host plants. Journal of Insect Conservation, 20, 1087–1098.
Konvicka M., Benes J., Cizek O., Kopecek F., Konvicka O. & Vitaz L. (2008) How too much care kills species: Grassland reserves, agri-environmental schemes and extinction of Colias myrmidone (Lepidoptera: Pieridae) from its former stronghold. Journal of Insect Conservation, 12, 519–525.

Key Messages:

Five studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of increasing grazing intensity or cutting frequency on grassland. Two studies were in Germany, and one study was in each of the Czech Republic, the USA and Israel.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in Germany found that at intensively grazed sites species richness of adult butterflies and burnet moths was lower than at sites with low or no grazing, but caterpillar richness was lower in intensively grazed and low grazing sites than in sites with no grazing.

POPULATION RESPONSE (5 STUDIES)

Abundance (5 studies): Four studies (including one replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study, one replicated, site comparison study, and two site comparison studies) in Germany, the USA and Israel found that grasslands managed with more intensive grazing or with grazing in addition to rotational burning had a lower abundance of all adult butterflies, adult burnet moths, adult regal fritillaries and spring webworm caterpillar nests than ungrazed grasslands, lightly or moderately grazed grasslands or rotationally burned grasslands with occasional light grazing. However, one of these studies found that, while intensively grazed sites had lower butterfly and burnet moth caterpillar abundance than ungrazed sites, there was no difference in caterpillar abundance between ungrazed and lightly grazed sites. One before-and-after study in the Czech Republic reported that after increasing the cutting frequency on traditional meadows (under agri-environment scheme prescriptions) the abundance of Danube clouded yellow decreased.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
