2730: Use an alternative commercial fishing method
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Almost all fishing methods catch small or unwanted fish that are thrown back into the sea after capture. There are many different types of fishing gear including trawls, which are towed through the water or over the seabed, traps which are usually baited and left on the seabed for a period of time, lines with baited hooks, and nets which can be left in the water or towed by fishing vessels to encircle schools of fish. Some types of fishing gears are more selective than others (i.e. they are better at only catching the desired species for market) and using an alternative type of fishing gear to catch the same commercially targeted fish could reduce the catches of unwanted fish.
Evidence for a similar intervention is summarized under ‘Alternative harvesting methods - Use hook and line fishing instead of other commercial fishing methods’. See also ‘Fishing gear modification - Use a separator trawl; Use a topless (coverless) trawl’ and ‘Use an electric (pulse) trawl’.

Key Messages:

Nine studies examined the effects of using an alternative commercial fishing method on marine fish populations. One study was in each of the Arafura Sea (Australia), the Greenland and Norwegian Seas (Norway), the Norwegian Sea (Norway), the Atlantic Ocean (Portugal), the Mediterranean Sea (Italy), the Gulf of Maine (USA), the Coral Sea (Australia), the Tyrrhenian Sea (Italy) and the Kattegat and Skagerrak (Sweden). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (9 STUDIES)

Reduction of unwanted catch (9 studies): Seven of nine replicated studies (two controlled, one randomized, controlled, one paired, controlled) in the Arafura Sea, Greenland/Norwegian Sea, Norwegian Sea, Atlantic Ocean, Mediterranean Sea, Gulf of Maine, Coral Sea, Tyrrhenian Sea and Kattegat and Skagerrak found that using an alternative method of fishing caught fewer discarded fish species and reduced the catches of unwanted (discarded or non-commercial species) fish overall, and of immature halibut, haddock, Atlantic cod, bluefin tuna and over half of the individual fish species. One study found that an alternative fishing method caught larger (and more likely to be mature) unwanted hammerhead sharks. The other study found that sizes of striped sea bream, annular sea bream and red mullet were similar in catches between gear types.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
