2674: Control human activity in a marine protected area with a zonation system of restrictions
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Marine Protected Areas are legally protected marine sites in which fish (among other marine animals and habitats) conservation can be promoted through controls on the fishing and other human activities that take place within its boundaries. The level of protection varies widely in protected areas, from the banning of all human access to permitting selected activities including some fishing types. Marine protected areas that want to allow a wide range of human activities are generally divided into zones with different rules on access and use in each. They may typically have reserve zones where all fishing is prohibited and ‘partially-protected zones’ that allow fishing with specified gears or for certain species only. Zoning of marine protected areas is considered an easy management measure to implement (Sale 2002) and is a way of providing or maintaining socio- and economic benefits to local regions and communities.
Evidence for similar interventions relating to prohibiting human activity, including fishing, in marine protected areas is summarized under ‘Cease or prohibit all types of fishing in a marine protected area’, ‘Cease or prohibit all fishing activity in a marine protected area with limited exceptions’ and ‘Restrict fishing activity (types unspecified) in a marine protected area’.
Sale P.F. (2002) Coral reef fishes: Dynamics and Diversity in a Complex Ecosystem. Elsevier Science, USA.

Key Messages:

Eight studies examined the effects of controlling human activity in a marine protected area with a zonation system of restrictions on marine fish populations. Three studies were in the Indian Ocean (South Africa), two were in the Coral Sea (Australia), and one was in each of the Southern Atlantic Ocean (South Africa), the Ligurian Sea (Italy) and the Philippine Sea (Philippines).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY) 

Richness/diversity (1 study): One site comparison study in the Philippine Sea found a higher number of fish species in the no-fishing/no access zone of a multi-zoned marine protected area compared to two partially fished zones and unprotected fished areas 10 to 15 years after implementation. 

POPULATION RESPONSE (4 STUDIES)

Condition (4 studies): Two of four site comparison studies in the southern Atlantic Ocean, Ligurian Sea, Indian Ocean and the Coral Sea found that controlling human activity in marine protected areas with a zonation system of restrictions resulted in larger average lengths of steentjies and three seabream species three years after implementation compared to unprotected fished areas, and lengths were largest within a no-take zone than a partially fished zone. Two other studies found larger sizes of four of four coral reef fish in a zone where nearly all fishing is prohibited compared to an adjacent zone with fewer fishing restrictions two to seven years after protection, and of two of six fish feeding groups in no-entry zones compared to both no-take and fished zones protected between 10 and 20 years.
Abundance (6 studies): Two of four site comparison studies (one replicated) in the Ligurian Sea, Philippine Sea and the Coral Sea found that controlling human activity in protected areas with a zonation system of restrictions resulted in a greater biomass and/or abundance of fish species after 3–15 years compared to unprotected areas outside, and between the zones fish abundance varied with the level of restriction and between individual fish groups and sizes. The other two studies found higher density, biomass, and abundance of fish in non-fished zones (no-entry and no-take) compared to fished zones inside areas protected for 10 to 27 years depending on region, but the effect varied between fish feeding groups, zone protection level and reef region. One site comparison study in the Indian Ocean found higher abundances of four of four reef fish species in a zone where nearly all fishing is prohibited, compared to an adjacent zone with fewer fishing restrictions. One site comparison study in the Southern Atlantic Ocean found that steentjies in a protected zone closed to fishing but open to other recreational activities had a different age and sex structure to a fished multipurpose zone, and both were different to a distant unprotected fished site with low steentjie exploitation.

BEHAVIOUR (2 STUDIES)

Use (2 studies): Two site comparison studies in the Indian Ocean found that in marine protected areas with zonation systems of activity controls, most of the individuals of the reef fish species tagged and released inside the protected areas were recaptured again at almost the same locations over the following nine or four years, and mainly in the zones where all or nearly all fishing was prohibited for up to 20 years, indicating increased protection from fishing.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
