3734: Translocate reptiles away from threats: Tuatara
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Translocations are sometimes carried out to remove individuals from specific threats within their range, for example away from development areas (‘mitigation translocation’). Mitigation translocations may be carried out as a preventative measure to protect individuals but have been criticized for prioritising the process of removing individuals above establishing viable populations of translocated individuals in the destination location (Sullivan et al. 2014). A number of issues should be carefully considered before carrying out such translocations, including whether the proposed release site contains suitable habitat; whether the release of additional animals at an occupied site could negatively impact on the resident population; and whether a translocation alone can mitigate the impact of losing suitable habitat due to a development or other threat.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians. See here for: Sea turtles; Tortoises, terrapins, side-necked & softshell turtles; Snakes & lizards or Crocodilians.
For studies where individuals are relocated for short periods to mitigate risks posed by temporary threats (e.g. habitat management) see Temporarily move reptiles away from short-term threats.
Sullivan B.K., Nowak E.M. & Kwiatkowski M.A. (2014) Problems with mitigation translocation of herpetofauna. Conservation Biology, 29, 12–18

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects of translocating tuatara away from threats on their populations. This study was global.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Abundance (1 study): One global review found that when using recruitment to the adult population as a measure of success, mitigation translocations (both away from threats and of problem reptiles) failed more often than those carried out for conservation or research purposes.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
