2717: Modify the configuration of a mesh escape panel/window in a trawl net
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Most types of commercial fishing gear catch unwanted fish that are unable to escape before being brought to the surface. To minimise this, escape panels can be fitted to some types of fishing gear, usually traps and trawl nets. Trawling is a method of fishing that involves pulling a fishing net (trawl) through the water behind one or more vessels. Fish entering the net will either be retained by it or may escape through the gaps in the mesh of the trawl netting during fishing. Some trawls are fitted with escape panels to allow small fish to escape from the net and avoid being caught. These panels often have square mesh and tend to have larger mesh than the rest of the trawl net. Escape panels need to be positioned correctly, and the positioning depends on which species they are targeting (Suuronen 2005). The mesh size of escape panels, and size of the panel itself, can affect the size, and therefore quantity, of fish that can escape through it.
Evidence for the related intervention is summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification - Fit mesh escape panels/windows to a trawl net’.
Suuronen P. (2005). Mortality of fish escaping trawl gears. FAO Fisheries Technical Paper, 478. Rome, FAO. 72p.

Key Messages:

Ten studies examined the effects of modifying the configuration (position/size and increased mesh size) of a mesh escape panel/window in a trawl net on marine fish populations. Four studies were in the Baltic Sea (Sweden/Poland). Two studies were in each of the North Sea (UK), the Irish Sea (UK) and the Kattegat and Skagerrak (Northern Europe). One study was in the Atlantic Ocean (Portugal). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Survival (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the Baltic Sea found that modifying the position of a mesh escape panel in a trawl net had no effect on the survival rate of cod.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (9 STUDIES)

Reduction of unwanted catch (5 studies): Three of five replicated, paired studies (one controlled) in the Irish Sea, Atlantic Ocean and Kattegat-Skagerrak found that modifying the position or mesh size of a mesh escape panel/window in a trawl net reduced the unwanted catches of whiting in one of two cases, haddock and whiting, and boarfish, but caught similar amounts of horse mackerel and blue whiting. The other studies found that catches of unwanted cod or other fish were not reduced.
Improved size-selectivity of fishing gear (4 studies): Two of four replicated, controlled studies in the North Sea and Baltic Sea found that modifying the position and/or size of a mesh escape panel in a trawl net improved size-selectivity of haddock and whiting. One of these studies also found that increasing the mesh size of the panel had no effect on size-selectivity for haddock. The other two studies found that size-selectivity was similar for cod compared to standard trawls.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
