2260: Locate artificial reefs near aquaculture systems to benefit from nutrient run-offs
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Artificial reefs are man-made structures intentionally put into the marine environment to act similarly to a natural reef. Originally used to improve fisheries and biological resources, they have been shown to be ecologically beneficial by locally enhancing biodiversity and increasing abundance (Bohnsack & Sutherland 1985; Clark & Edwards 1999). By locating an artificial reef near an aquaculture system, the introduced reef can potentially benefit from the nutrient-rich run-offs frequently associated with aquaculture systems, thereby promoting the colonisation and development of a subtidal benthic invertebrate community on the reef (Aguado-Giménez et al. 2011).
Evidence for related interventions is summarised under “Threat: Pollution – Locate artificial reefs near aquaculture systems to act as biofilters” and “Threat: Energy production and mining – Co-locate aquaculture systems with other activities and infrastructures (such as windfarms)”.
 
Aguado-Giménez F., Piedecausa M.A., Carrasco C., Gutiérrez J.M., Aliaga V. & García-García B. (2011) Do benthic biofilters contribute to sustainability and restoration of the benthic environment impacted by offshore cage finfish aquaculture? Marine Pollution Bulletin, 62, 1714–1724.
Bohnsack J.A. & Sutherland D.L. (1985) Artificial reef research: a review with recommendations for future priorities. Bulletin of Marine Science, 37, 11–39.
Clark S. & Edwards A.J. (1999) An evaluation of artificial reef structures as tools for marine habitat rehabilitation in the Maldives. Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems, 9, 5–21.

Key Messages:

Two studies examined the effects of locating artificial reefs near aquaculture systems to benefit from nutrient run-offs on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations. One study was in the Gulf of Aqaba (Israel and Jordan), and one in the Mediterranean Sea (Spain).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Overall community composition (1 study): One controlled study in the Mediterranean Sea found that an artificial reef located under aquaculture cages had similar invertebrate community composition to artificial reefs located at sites without aquaculture cages.

POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Overall abundance (1 study): One controlled study in the Gulf of Aqaba found that an artificial reef located at an aquaculture site had similar invertebrate biomass growing on it compared to an artificial reef located at a site without aquaculture cages.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
