123: Control weeds without damaging other plants in conservation areas
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:

This intervention involves controlling perennial weeds in nature conservation areas including field margins or fallow land. Invasive weed species can have an impact on the conservation and restoration of biodiversity, but control with herbicides can also be detrimental to non-target species (English Nature 2003). The use of mechanical methods and biological control, including the use of pathogens, are important alternatives to chemical control strategies, particularly where adverse effects of agrochemicals on the environment must be minimized or avoided (English Nature 2003).
The majority of evidence on the effectiveness of these interventions is currently available for creeping thistle Cirsium arvense, which is a persistent perennial weed that causes problems in arable fields, grasslands, pastures and within nature conservation areas. Limited evidence is available for purple moor grass Molinia caerulea, which can threaten the conservation of heather Calluna vulgaris dominated moorland or heathland.
See also ‘Control invasive non-native plants on farmland’ for studies which looked at methods of controlling non-native plants.
English Nature (2003) The Herbicide Handbook: Guidance on the use of herbicides on nature conservation sites. English Nature/FACT, West Yorkshire.

 

Key Messages:

Two studies looked at the effects of controlling weeds on the surrounding vegetation. One study from the UK found that new populations of rare arable plants established following the control of perennial weeds in a nature conservation area. A replicated, controlled and randomized study in the UK found that using grass-specific herbicide reduced grass diversity and resulted in increases in broadleaved plants. 
Eleven studies investigated different methods of controlling plants. A review found that specific management regimes can reduce the abundance of pernicious weeds in nature conservation areas. Four replicated controlled studies (one also randomized) from Denmark and Germany found cutting and infection with fungal pathogens were effective methods for controlling creeping thistle and one replicated, randomized, controlled trial from the UK found long-term control was achieved by lenient grazing. A replicated, controlled and randomized study in Germany found weevils could be used to infect creeping thistle with systemic rust. One study found a non-native beetle was unsuitable for controlling creeping thistle because it had poor survival in the UK climate. A replicated controlled study found that spraying a high concentration of herbicide killed less than half of broad-leaved dock plants. A replicated, controlled, randomized study found black grass was eliminated with a December treatment of grass-specific herbicide. A small replicated study found that Hebridean sheep grazed more purple moor grass than Swaledale sheep.
Two replicated controlled laboratory and grassland studies found negative impacts of the herbicide asulam on green dock beetles.

 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Farmland Conservation
Description: Farmland Synopsis
