3814: Set catch shares by species
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Catch share is a fishery management system that allocates harvest rights to individuals or communities. There are two main types: quota- and area-based catch shares. Quota-based systems set a species or fishery-wide catch limit (also referred to as the total allowable catch or TAC), a portion of which is assigned to individuals or groups for harvest, with the participants being directly accountable for staying within the limits. Such systems are typically called ‘Individual Fishing Quotas’ (IFQs) but variations may also be referred to as ‘Limited Access Privileges’ or LAPs (Anon. 2021). In some regions such as Australia, quota can be based on fishing effort entitling a fisher to use a certain amount of fishing gear (length of net, number of hooks etc.). Fishers can only use the amount of fishing gear for which they have quota. When the catch shares are transferable (between stakeholders) they are known as ‘Individual Transferable Quota’ (ITQs) and if entities want to fish more than their individual quota they have to buy quota from other fishers. Introducing catch share systems in the form of quotas by species or fishery may limit fishing effort and mortality and help ensure sustainability by reducing effects of overfishing.
Evidence for related interventions is summarized under ‘Set an overall catch limit (quota cap or total allowable catch) by fishery or fleet’, ‘Introduce catch shares’ and Set catch shares by area‘.
Anon. The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. (2021). The Use of Limited Access Privilege Programs in Mixed-Use Fisheries. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.

Key Messages:

One study examined the effects of setting catch shares by species on marine fish populations. The study was in the Pacific Ocean (Canada).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (1 STUDY)

Reduction of unwanted catch (1 study): One before-and-after study in the Pacific Ocean found that after a species-specific catch share was set (Individual Vessel Bycatch Quota) unwanted halibut catch in a multi-species fishery was reduced, whereas it was higher under a previous catch share system (Individual Transferable Quota) based on all species in the catch.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
