134: Use organic rather than mineral fertilizers
Effectiveness rating: Beneficial
Background information and definitions:

The use of chemicals in agricultural management, such as synthetic fertilizers, may have a detrimental effect on farmland biodiversity. Organic fertilizers such as farmyard manure (including green manure or crop residues), slurry and other composts provide an alternative to synthetic or mineral fertilizers. Mineral fertilizers are manufactured preparations including nitrogen N, phosphorous P or potassium K, or 'NPK'.

 

Key Messages:

Seventeen studies (including three reviews) from Austria, Belgium, Germany, Ireland, Switzerland and the UK looked at the effects of using organic rather than mineral fertilizers. Fourteen studies (including two reviews and seven replicated and controlled studies, of which four also randomized) from Austria, Belgium, Germany, Ireland, Switzerland and the UK found that areas treated with organic rather than mineral fertilizers supported higher plant diversity and cover or species richness, increased earthworm abundance or diversity, biomass and density and increased abundance and/or species richness of some or all invertebrates investigated. 
A literature review found organic fertilizers without pesticides produced highest earthworm biomass. A small trial in Belgium found more predatory beetles on an arable field two years after organic fertilizer application than on a control plot.
One randomized, replicated, controlled trial in the UK found that using organic rather than mineral fertilizers did not affect the abundance of three weed species. A replicated study from Ireland found that the application of farmyard manure had no long-term effect on invertebrates, whilst two studies from the UK found the increase in arthropod predators and springtails was only seen at a local not a field scale. A review found one study from the UK reporting that heavy applications of slurry can be toxic to common earthworms.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Farmland Conservation
Description: Farmland Synopsis
