3662: Protect habitat: Sea turtles
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Legally protecting habitat may reduce its conversion and degradation by humans. This may in turn serve to maintain or slow the decline of the abundance and diversity of reptiles that make use of that habitat.
Assessing the effectiveness of protected areas is particularly difficult. For example, protected and unprotected areas used for comparison might start off with different quality habitats (protection often being granted to the best quality habitat). Protected areas are also more likely to be in remote areas, so less accessible to threats such as harvesting (Joppa & Pfaff 2009). Finally, effectiveness is best monitored over long timescales, but this increases the chance that other factors influence the ecosystem. The most reliable studies would compare similar quality protected and unprotected areas over time, and possibly correct for some of the biases.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group. See here for all reptiles (excluding sea turtles).
Joppa L.N. & Pfaff A. (2009) High and far: biases in the location of protected areas. PLoS ONE, 4, e8273.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects of protecting habitat on sea turtle populations. One study was in each of Costa Rica, the Seychelles, Belize and the USA.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (4 STUDIES)

Abundance (3 studies): One before-and-after study in Costa Rica found that after an area was protected, there were fewer nesting female leatherback turtles than before protection. One replicated, randomized, site comparison study off the coast of Belize found that in protected areas there were more hawksbill turtles than outside. One site comparison study in the USA found that differences in the abundance of green, loggerhead and hawksbill turtles in protected and unprotected areas were mixed.
Reproductive success (2 studies): One before-and-after study in Costa Rica found that after an area was protected, more leatherback turtle hatchlings were produced than before protection. One before-and-after study in the Seychelles found that nesting activity by green turtles increased following both habitat and species protection.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
