3796: Relocate nests/eggs for artificial incubation: Tortoises, terrapins, side-necked & softshell turtles
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Relocating eggs to artificially incubate them may be used as a way to maximise hatching success as the eggs will no longer be vulnerable to natural threats such as predation. Consideration must be given to the potential impacts of incubation conditions (for example temperature and humidity) on the sex, size, shape, colour, behaviour, movement ability and post-hatching growth of reptile hatchlings (Warner & Andrews 2002, Booth et al. 2006).
This action includes studies where eggs are incubated in artificial conditions, which ranges from controlled laboratory settings to using polystyrene boxes to incubate eggs in buildings. Studies are also included where gravid females are brought into captivity to lay eggs, but eggs are taken away from the females for artificial incubation.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians. See here for: Sea turtles; Snakes & lizards; Crocodilians or Tuatara.
For studies that discuss the effects of relocating and re-burying eggs in natural habitats to avoid threats, see Relocate nests/eggs to a hatchery and Relocate nests/eggs to a nearby natural setting (not including hatcheries)
See also Maintain wild-caught, gravid females in captivity during gestation and Alter incubation temperatures to achieve optimal/desired sex ratio.
Booth D.T. (2006) Influence of incubation temperature on hatchling phenotype in reptiles. Physiological and Biochemical Zoology, 79, 274–281.
Warner D.A. & Andrews R.M. (2002) Laboratory and field experiments identify sources of variation in phenotypes and survival of hatchling lizards. Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 76, 105–124.

Key Messages:

Seventeen studies evaluated the effects of relocating nests/eggs for artificial incubation on tortoise, terrapin, side-necked & softshell turtle Ten studies were in the USA, two were in each of the Galápagos and China and one was in each of Brazil, Venezuela and Thailand.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (17 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (16 studies): Two of three replicated controlled studies (including one randomized study) in Brazil, Venezuela and the USA found that Hilaire’s side-necked turtle and bog turtle nests relocated for artificial incubation had higher hatching success, or likely had higher success, than natural nests.The other study found that yellow-headed sideneck turtle nests relocated for artificial incubation had lower hatching success than natural nests and nests moved to an on-beach hatchery. One replicated study in the Galápagos reported that hatching success of five subspecies of giant tortoise nests relocated for artificial incubation was 35–100%, compared to 76–85% for natural nests of two sub species. Six of eight studies (including four replicated studies) in the USA and China reported that hatching success for artificially incubated eggs, including eggs recovered from road-killed turtles, was 60–97%, or that 314 hatchlings emerged, and 14 eggs did not hatch. One study also found that eggs collected from the wild had similar hatching success compared to oxytocin-induced eggs. The other two studies reported that hatching success of eggs or clutches was 39–54%. One replicated study in the Galápagos reported that hatching success of giant tortoise nests relocated for artificial incubation may have been higher for nests relocated longer after laying. One replicated study in the USA found that high levels of CO2 during artificial incubation of pond slider and Mississippi map turtle eggs resulted in lower hatching success compared to low CO2. One replicated, randomized study in China found that hatching success of artificially incubated Chinese three-keeled pond turtle eggs was similar across all temperatures tested. One randomized study in the USA found that hatching success of artificially incubated snapping turtle eggs was highest at intermediate levels of soil moisture.
Survival (3 studies): Two studies (including one replicated study) in the USA reported that after relocating smooth softshell turtle and gopher tortoise nests for artificial incubation, two of 314 and three of 36 hatchlings died soon after emergence. One randomized study in the USA found that survival of artificially incubated snapping turtle hatchlings was lower at high soil moisture levels compared to intermediate moisture levels.
Condition (4 studies): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in Brazil found that Hilaire’s side-necked turtle nests relocated for artificial incubation produced heavier hatchlings that were larger in four of five measures compared to hatchlings from natural nests. Two replicated studies (including one randomized study) in China found that modifying incubation temperatures of Chinese three-keeled pond turtle or Asian yellow pond turtle eggs had mixed effects on hatchling size and mobility or different effects on growth depending on the population eggs were sourced from. One replicated study in Thailand found that artificially incubating snail-eating turtle eggs at higher temperatures resulted in more embryos with physical deformities.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (1 STUDY)

Offspring sex ratio (1 study): One replicated study in the USA found that high levels of CO2 during artificial incubation of pond slider and Mississippi map turtle eggs resulted in a lower proportion of male hatchlings compared to low CO2


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
