3959: Reduce grazing intensity on grassland by reducing stocking density
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Productive grasslands used for livestock production are intensively managed, with high stocking densities resulting in a closely cropped sward (Bubová et al. 2015). While grazing is important for maintaining open grassland, reducing grazing intensity by decreasing stocking density allows some vegetation to grow taller, increasing structural complexity and floral diversity (Morris 2000), and this may provide more suitable habitat for some grassland butterflies and moths (e.g. Elligsen et al. 1997).
For studies on reducing grazing intensity by removing livestock for part of the year, see “Reduce grazing intensity on grassland by seasonal removal of livestock”. For studies on reducing grazing intensity alongside other reductions in management intensity, such as reduced chemical input, see “Reduce management intensity on permanent grasslands (several interventions at once)”. For studies on removing grazing entirely, see “Cease grazing on grassland to allow early succession”. For studies on increasing grassland management, see “Increase grazing intensity or cutting frequency on grassland”.
Elligsen H., Beinlich B. & Plachter H. (1997) Effects of large-scale cattle grazing on populations of Coenonympha glycerion and Lasiommata megera (Lepidoptera: Satyridae). Journal of Insect Conservation, 1, 13–23.
Morris M.G. (2000) The effects of structure and its dynamics on the ecology and conservation of arthropods in British grasslands. Biological Conservation, 95, 129–142.
Bubová T., Vrabec V., Kulma M. & Nowicki P. (2015) Land management impacts on European butterflies of conservation concern: a review. Journal of Insect Conservation, 19, 805–821.

Key Messages:

Fourteen studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of reducing grazing intensity on grassland by reducing stocking density. Four studies were in the UK, two were in each of Sweden and Germany, one was in each of the USA, Belgium and the Netherlands, Europe and Switzerland.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (8 STUDIES)

Richness/diversity (8 studies): Five of eight replicated studies (including two randomized, controlled studies and six site comparison studies) in the UK, Sweden, Germany, the USA and Switzerland found that grasslands grazed with lower stocking densities of sheep, cattle or a mix of sheep, cattle and horses had a greater species richness of adult butterflies, all moths and burnet moths than grassland grazed at higher stocking densities. However, one of these studies also found that butterfly and burnet moth caterpillar species richness was similar at sites with low and high stocking densities. Two of the other studies found that grasslands grazed with lower stocking densities of cattle and horses or unspecified grazing animals had a similar species richness of butterflies and burnet moths to grassland grazed at higher stocking densities. The other study found that, in one of two study years, grasslands grazed with cattle at a low density had lower species richness than grasslands grazed at moderate density.

POPULATION RESPONSE (12 STUDIES)

Abundance (11 studies): Eight replicated studies (including four controlled studies and four site comparison studies) in the UK, Germany, the USA and Sweden found that grasslands grazed with lower stocking densities of sheep, cattle or both (in one case combined with a later start to grazing) had a greater abundance of all butterflies, butterflies with grass host plants, all moths, burnet moths, their caterpillars or specific species (in two cases as part of combined invertebrate counts) than grasslands grazed at higher stocking densities. The three studies on caterpillars only found a higher abundance at two out of three sites or in earlier or later sampling periods, and one of the studies found that sites with low and high intensity grazing had a similar abundance of butterfly and burnet moth caterpillars. Two replicated, site comparison studies in Sweden and Switzerland found that grasslands grazed with lower stocking densities of cattle and horses or unspecified grazing animals had a similar abundance of butterflies and burnet moths to grassland grazed at higher stocking densities. One review of studies in Europe reported that reducing grazing intensity benefitted 41 out of 67 butterfly species of conservation concern, but did not distinguish between reducing stocking density and seasonal removal of livestock.
Survival (1 study): One site comparison study in Belgium and the Netherlands reported that the survival of Glanville fritillary caterpillar nests was similar between grasslands with low and high stocking density of sheep.
Condition (1 study): One site comparison study in Belgium and the Netherlands found that after 6–10 days of sheep grazing, fewer Glanville fritillary caterpillar nests were damaged in a grassland with lower stocking density than in a grassland with higher stocking density, but there was no difference after two months.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
