126: Reduce tillage
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Conventional ploughing uses a mould-board plough, cultivating to a depth of around 20 cm. This intervention includes various methods to reduce the depth or intensity of ploughing, such as layered cultivation, non-inversion tillage and conservation tillage. It also includes stopping tillage altogether in some areas.
Reduced tillage is often used in the context of ‘Integrated Farm Management’ (IFM), a whole farm system designed to enhance natural processes within a productive system (for example Hasken & Poehling 1995). These studies have not been included here unless the effects can clearly be related to the tillage practice as opposed to other elements of the system such as crop rotation, field margins, or reduced chemical use.
Conservation tillage, often accompanied by the use of cover crops or retention of crop residues, is widely practiced in the USA. A 2004 review (Holland 2004) of the broad environmental effects of conservation tillage found the bulk of the evidence came from North American studies, with studies from Europe being sparse. For example, seven American studies found more ground-nesting birds on conservation tillage fields than conventionally tilled fields, and two studies found that rodents were more abundant in conservation tillage fields. However, both bird and rodent faunas in North America are functionally different from those in Europe (more ground-nesting birds in arable fields in the US, for example).
A set of studies on the effects of avoiding tillage when re-seeding heathland with grass to improve it for grazing (Grant 1992a-c) is included under ‘Employ areas of semi-natural habitat for rough grazing’.
Grant M. C. (1992a) The effects of re-seeding heathland on breeding whimbrel Numenius phaeopus in Shetland. I. Nest distributions. Journal of Applied Ecology, 29, 501-508.
Grant M. C., Chambers R. E. & Evans P. R. (1992b) The effects of re-seeding heathland on breeding whimbrel Numenius phaeopus in Shetland. II. Habitat use by adults during the pre-laying period. Journal of Applied Ecology, 29, 509-515.

Key Messages:

A total of 42 individual studies (including seven replicated, controlled and randomized studies and six reviews) from Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Hungary, Ireland, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Slovakia, Switzerland and the UK investigated the effects of reducing tillage on farmland wildlife. Thirty-four studies (of which 21 were replicated and controlled and seven also randomized, and five reviews) from nine European countries found some positive effects on earthworms, some invertebrates (other than earthworms), weeds or farmland birds, of reducing tillage compared to conventional management. Positive effects included increased biomass, species richness or abundance of earthworms, greater abundance of some invertebrates other than earthworms, increased numbers of some weeds and/or weed species, higher Eurasian skylark nest density, earlier laying date and shorter foraging distances on reduced tillage fields, and greater abundance of some birds - including Eurasian skylark, seed-eating songbirds and gamebirds in late winter on non-inversion or conservation tillage. A review found tillage had negative effects on invertebrate numbers and no-till systems had more invertebrate bird food resources.
Twenty-six studies (of which 13 replicated and controlled and three also randomized, and five reviews) from nine European countries found reducing tillage had either negative, no effect or no consistent effects on abundance, biomass, or species richness of some invertebrates (other than earthworms), earthworm abundance, biomass, or species richness, number of different plant species found as seeds, number of some weed species, mammal abundance, some bird species, and one study found bird preferences for conservation tillage fields decreased over time. Two studies found that crop type affected the number of weeds under different tillage regimes.
One small replicated trial in the UK compared bird numbers under two different forms of reduced tillage, and found more birds from species that make up the ‘Farmland Bird Index’ on broadcast than non-inversion tillage fields.
Two studies looked at the long-term effects of reduced tillage on earthworms (after ten years). One study found higher earthworm biomass under reduced tillage, the other study found earthworm abundance was the same between conventional and reduced tillage plots.
Three of the studies mentioned above did not distinguish between the effects of reducing tillage and reduced pesticide and/or fertilizer inputs.

 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Farmland Conservation
Description: Farmland Synopsis
