3357: Prune roots of trees/shrubs before planting: freshwater wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Plants can be stressed by the process of planting into a new site. Pruning before planting can encourage the growth of new, nutrient-assimilating feeder roots close to the plant: within the zone of roots that will be moved with the plant (Swackhamer & Sellmer 2007). It can also make planting process quicker and easier (Allen & Kennedy 1989).
To be summarized as evidence for this action, studies must have explicitly compared the performance of pruned and unpruned plants. Studies that simply report the performance of pruned plants are not summarized here. Studies do not have to be in flooded/saturated soils, as long as they involve wetland-characteristic species.
Allen J.A. & Kennedy H.E. (1989) Bottomland Hardwood Reforestation in the Lower Mississippi Valley. USFWS/USDAFS Report.
Swackhamer E. & Sellmer J. (2007) Transplanting or Moving Trees and Shrubs in the Landscape. Available at http://extension.psu.edu/transplanting-or-moving-trees-and-shrubs-in-the-landscape. Accessed 9 December 2019.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects – on trees/shrubs typical of freshwater wetlands – of pruning their roots before planting. Both studies were in the USA. One study was in a laboratory.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE
 
VEGETATION STRUCTURE
 
OTHER

Survival (2 studies): One replicated, controlled study in created wetlands in the USA reported that root-pruned red maple Acer rubrum seedlings had a higher survival rate than unpruned seedlings, 1–2 years after planting. One replicated, randomized, controlled study in a laboratory in the USA found that root-pruned and unpruned Nuttall oak Quercus nuttallii seedlings had similar survival rates, 108 days after planting.
Growth (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in a laboratory in the USA found that root-pruned and unpruned Nuttall oak Quercus nuttallii seedlings grew in height by a similar amount over the first 108 days after planting.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
