1761: Cut large trees/shrubs to maintain or restore disturbance
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Regular disturbance may maintain vegetation in a desirable, semi-natural state – particularly in fen meadows and some fens (Middleton 2012). In particular, disturbance can clear shrubs and trees that would otherwise become dominant. To control woody vegetation, conservationists may sometimes want to restore or compensate for a disturbance that has been lost. Initially, large trees and shrubs may need to be managed by cutting them close to the ground. Afterwards, a traditional mowing or grazing regime may be resumed to keep regrowth of trees or shrubs in check, and manage the vegetation as a whole.
Caution: Tree/shrub removal may be desirable on a subset of peatlands e.g. open bogs, fens and fen meadows. Tree thinning may be desirable on some naturally forested peatlands - but tree removal is more typically a threat here.
Related actions: cutting/mowing herbaceous plants and small woody plants, to maintain or restore disturbance or control problematic plants whose growth is not attributed to loss of traditional management.
Middleton B.A. (2012) Rediscovering traditional vegetation management in preserves: trading experiences between cultures and continents. Biological Conservation, 158, 750–760.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects, on peatland vegetation, of cutting large trees/shrubs to maintain or restore disturbance. One study was in a forested fen and one was in an open fen. N.B. Cutting large trees/shrubs in peatlands with no history of disturbance is considered as a separate action.
Plant community composition (1 study): One before-and-after, site comparison study in a fen in Poland found that in an area where shrubs were removed (along with other interventions), the plant community composition became more like a target fen meadow.
Characteristic plants (1 study): One before-and-after, site comparison study in a fen in Poland found that in an area where shrubs were removed (along with other interventions), the abundance of fen meadow plant species increased.
Vegetation cover (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in forested fen in the USA found that cutting and removing trees increased herb cover, but had no effect on shrub cover.
Vegetation structure (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in a peat swamp in the USA found that cutting and removing trees increased herb biomass and height.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
