648: Provide supplementary food for birds or mammals
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This intervention may involve the provision of supplementary food for birds or mammals in farmland habitats, such food typically includes seeds. Providing supplementary food for farmland wildlife may be particularly important when food resources in the wider farmed environment are scarce.
Food supply is one of the key factors determining mortality and reproductive rates. Providing supplementary food is therefore often used as a technique to support small populations. However, feeding is only likely to have a positive effect on a population if the food supply is limiting either reproduction or survival.
As with all interventions in this synopsis, studies that investigate population‐level effects are most useful for conservationists. This is especially true for supplementary feeding, as many birds have large foraging ranges and the appearance of increased numbers at a feeding station, or even in the habitat surrounding feeders may not represent an increase in numbers but a redistribution of the same birds, and could even hide a population decline. It is also important to note that the effect of providing food can be confounded by many factors. For example, variations in natural food supplies due to population cycles or irregular fruiting, whilst droughts or other extreme weather and pollution levels can also affect how populations respond to food.
See also ‘Provide other resources for birds (water, sand for bathing)’ for studies which investigate the impact of providing resources other than food.

Key Messages:

A total of 18 individual studies      investigated the effects of providing supplementary food. Nine studies      from France, Sweden and the UK (six      replicated studies, of which five controlled and one also randomized and      paired) found that the provision of supplementary      food increased farmland bird abundance, breeding population size, density,      body mass,      hatching, nestling growth and fledging rates, increased overwinter      survival of a declining house sparrow population and that fed male hen harriers bred with more females than control birds.      Two studies did not separate the      effects of several other interventions carried out on the same study site.      Four studies from the UK and Finland (three replicated studies,      of which one controlled and one randomized) found that farmland songbirds and field      voles (field voles on unmown plots only) used supplementary food when provided,      including the majority of targeted species such as tree sparrow,      yellowhammer and corn bunting.
Five replicated studies from the UK (of which two also controlled) found that the provision of supplementary food had no clear effect on farmland bird breeding abundance, European turtle dove reproductive success, territory size or territory density, overwinter survival of three stable house sparrow populations, tree sparrow nest box use, or the abundance of weed seeds on the soil surface. One replicated, controlled study from Sweden found no effect of supplementary food provision on common starling clutch size or nestling weight, and lower fledging rates in nests which received supplementary food compared to nests without supplementary food in one year.
Four studies from the UK (two replicated of which one was also randomized and controlled) found that the use of supplementary food by farmland birds varied between species and region, depended upon the time of year and proximity to other feeding stations and natural feeding areas.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Farmland Conservation
Description: Farmland Synopsis
