139: Reduce fertilizer, pesticide or herbicide use generally
Effectiveness rating: Beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Pesticide, herbicide and fertilizer applications may have a negative impact on farmland wildlife. This intervention may involve reducing or ceasing applications of pesticides (such as insecticides, fungicides), herbicides and fertilizers.
Several European countries (Denmark, the Netherlands and Sweden) introduced initiatives in the 1990s to reduce pesticide applications (Pretty 2005). In Denmark, a Pesticide Action Plan was introduced in 1986 with the aim of reducing total pesticide applications by 50% in 10 years in order to reduce impacts on biodiversity and groundwater resources (Jørgensen & Kudsk 2006). Reductions continued and by 2004, Danish farmers had reduced inputs of pesticides by 56% (kg of active ingredient) and 20% (treatment frequency index) (Jørgensen & Kudsk 2006).
See also ‘Leave headlands in fields unsprayed (conservation headlands)’, which also has monitoring of biodiversity in response to reduced fertilizer, pesticide and herbicide applications.
Pretty J. (2005) Sustainability in agriculture: recent progress and emergent challenges. Issues in Environmental Science and Technology, 21, 1-15.
Jørgensen L.N. & Kudsk P. (2006) Twenty years’ experience with reduced agrochemical inputs: effects on farm economics, water quality, biodiversity and environment. Proceedings of the HGCA conference – Arable crop protection in the balance: Profit and the environment. 25-26 January 2006. 16.1-16.10.

Key Messages:

Of 38 individual studies from Austria, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, the Netherlands, Sweden and the UK investigating the effects of reducing fertilizers, pesticides or herbicides, 34 studies (23 replicated, of which six also controlled and randomized, one review and one systematic review) found benefits to some invertebrates, plants, or farmland birds. Twenty-five studies (16 replicated, of which seven also randomized and controlled and one review) found negative, mixed, minimal or no effects on some invertebrates, farmland birds or plants.
Ten studies (six replicated, controlled studies of which two randomized) from three countries found positive effects of reducing or stopping pesticide applications on invertebrates, plants, or birds. Eight studies (two replicated controlled and randomized, one paired before-and-after trial) from four countries found inconsistent or no effects on some invertebrates or birds.
Ten studies (nine replicated, five also controlled and a European systematic review) from four countries found positive effects of reducing or stopping herbicide use on plants, invertebrates, and birds. Five replicated studies (two also controlled and randomized) from three countries found no or mixed effects on birds, invertebrates and plants.
Five studies (three replicated controlled of which two randomized) from four countries found positive effects of reducing or stopping fertilizer applications on invertebrates, Eurasian skylark, or plants. Four studies (three replicated, controlled and randomized) from two countries found reducing or stopping fertilizer inputs had no, or no consistent effects on some invertebrates and farmland birds. Two studies from the UK (one replicated) found plots where fertilizer inputs were not reduced tended to have higher earthworm biomass or abundance.
Fifteen studies (three replicated controlled of which one also randomized, five site comparisons and one review) from seven countries looked at the effects of reducing or stopping applications of two or more inputs: pesticides, herbicides, or fertilizers. Thirteen studies found positive effects of reducing two or more inputs on some or all invertebrates, plants, soil organisms, and birds studied. Seven studies found negative or no effects of reducing combinations of inputs on some invertebrates, plants or birds.

 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Farmland Conservation
Description: Farmland Synopsis
