989: Use selective or reduced impact logging instead of conventional logging
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Selective logging is the removal of selected trees within a forest based on criteria such as diameter, height, or species. Remaining trees are left in the stand, as opposed to clearcutting where all trees are felled.
Reduced impact logging is a sustainable harvesting and management method that aims to minimize ecological disturbance. It involves selective logging as well as other practices such as directional tree felling, stream buffer zones, constructing roads, trails and landings to minimum widths, and methods to extract timber with minimal damage. One study on reduced impact logging has been included but the effects of selective logging cannot be separated from the other interventions used.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects of using selective or reduced impact logging instead of conventional logging on bat populations. Two studies were in the Neotropics, one study was in Italy and one in Germany.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, controlled, site comparison study in Trinidad found that the composition of bat species differed between selectively logged and conventionally logged forest.
Richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in Germany found similar bat diversity in selectively logged and conventionally logged forest.

POPULATION RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Abundance (3 studies): One replicated, site comparison study in Germany found similar overall bat activity (relative abundance) in selectively logged and conventionally logged forest. One review of 41 studies in the Neotropics found that reduced impact logging had a smaller effect on bat abundance than conventional logging. One replicated, site comparison study in Italy found greater bat activity at two of three sites that used selective logging techniques to open up the forest canopy rather than leaving the canopy intact.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Bat Conservation
Description: Update 2020
