3378: Physically damage tree/shrub seeds before sowing: freshwater wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Damaging, weakening or softening the coating of seeds before planting can help to break seed dormancy and encourage germination. For species with physical dormancy, damage to the seed coat can increase its permeability to water and gases, which are essential for germination. For a database of seed dormancy class by species, see Baskin & Baskin (2014).
This action includes mechanically damaging seeds (e.g. by rubbing them with sandpaper or nicking them with a knife) and removing excess tissues from around the seed (e.g. the sac-like perigynia around sedge seeds). To be summarized as evidence for this action, studies must have explicitly compared the performance of treated and untreated seeds. Studies that simply report the performance of treated seeds are not summarized here. Studies do not have to be in flooded/saturated soils, as long as they involve wetland-characteristic species.
Related actions: Soak seeds before sowing; Chill seeds before sowing; Heat seeds before sowing; Expose seeds to light before sowing; Treat seeds with chemicals before sowing.
Baskin C.C. & Baskin J.M. (2014) Seeds: Ecology, Biogeography and Evolution of Dormancy and Germination, Second Edition. Academic Press.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects – on trees/shrubs typical of freshwater wetlands – of physically damaging their seeds before sowing. The study was in a laboratory in the USA.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE
 
VEGETATION STRUCTURE 
       
OTHER

Germination/emergence (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in a laboratory in the USA found that cutting baldcypress Taxodium distichum seeds in half before sowing reduced their germination rate.
Growth (1 study): The same study found that cutting baldcypress Taxodium distichum seeds in half before sowing had no significant effect on the height of surviving seedlings, 30 days after germination.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
