962: Pay farmers to cover the costs of conservation measures (e.g. agri-environment schemes)
Effectiveness rating: Unlikely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This action involves compensating farmers financially for changing agricultural practices to be more favourable to biodiversity and the landscape, usually through government or inter-governmental schemes. Such schemes exist around the world, although the terminology used may differ. For example, agri-environment schemes are used in the UK and Europe. In the USA, there are incentive programs such as The Environmental Quality Incentives Program and the Conservation Stewardship Program.
In the UK, agri-environment schemes use many different specific interventions which may be beneficial to bats such as the protection and maintenance of archaeological features, traditional farm buildings and stone walls; the restoration and enhancement of key habitats such as woodland, wetlands and hedgerows; and improvements to air and water quality. Three studies that evaluated the overall effects of agri-environment schemes are discussed here. See also ‘Reduce pesticide, herbicide and fertiliser use’.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects of agri-environment schemes on bat populations. The three studies were in the UK.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Abundance (3 studies): Two of three replicated, paired sites studies in the UK found that overall bat activity (relative abundance) or the occurrence of six bat species did not differ significantly between farms managed under agri-environment schemes and those managed conventionally. One of the studies found that agri-environment scheme farms had similar activity of five bat species, and lower activity of one bat species, compared to conventional farms. The other study found lower overall bat activity and activity of pipistrelle species on agri-environment scheme farms than conventional farms.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Bat Conservation
Description: Update 2020
