3974: Reduce field size (or maintain small fields) 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Continuous large areas of arable crops or intensively-managed grassland can be inhospitable for butterflies and moths. However, field edges such as hedgerows, ditches and grass or flower margins may provide important resources which are lacking in the managed field centres. Reducing field sizes, and therefore increasing the density of field edge habitat, may improve the habitat quality for butterflies and moths within the farmed landscape.
See also “Plant new hedges”, “Create uncultivated margins around intensive arable or pasture fields” and “Plant grass buffer strips/margins around arable or pasture fields”.

Key Messages:

Five studies evaluated the effects of reducing field size on butterflies and moths. Two studies were in Switzerland, and one was in each of Germany, Sweden and the Czech Republic and Poland.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (5 STUDIES)

Richness/diversity (5 studies): Two of four replicated, site comparison studies in Sweden, the Czech Republic and Poland and Switzerland found that arable farms (in more diverse landscapes) and landscapes with smaller fields had a higher species richness of butterflies and burnet moths than areas with larger fields. The other two studies found that mixed farms and landscapes with smaller fields had a similar species richness of butterflies to areas with larger fields. One before-and-after study in Germany found that after reducing field size by increasing the length of field edges on a farm, along with increasing the area of meadows and field margins, the species richness of butterflies and burnet moths increased.

POPULATION RESPONSE (4 STUDIES)

Abundance (4 studies): Four replicated, site comparison studies in Sweden, the Czech Republic and Poland and Switzerland found that arable and mixed farms and landscapes with smaller fields had a higher abundance of butterflies and burnet moths than areas with larger fields.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
