2672: Cease or prohibit spearfishing
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Spearfishing is a technique of hunting fish underwater, historically with sharpened or barbed sticks, but in current times often using powered metal spearguns. Spearfishing is done by free diving, snorkelling or scuba diving and is one of the few fishing techniques where each target fish is individually selected, and unwanted catch is virtually nil. However, spearfishing is widely used, is an effective and efficient method of harvesting fish and activities may be concentrated at habitats such as reefs. In heavily targeted areas, local fish populations can be severely depleted (Dulvy & Polunin 2004; Godoy et al. 2010) or may suffer other impacts related to the removal of particular sizes or sexes of fish (Alonzo & Mangel 2004). Spearfishing activity is managed throughout the world with a wide range of restrictions ranging from complete bans to prohibiting the use of scuba or spearguns or allowing only recreational spearfishing. Prohibiting spearfishing may often be implemented in marine protected areas with the aim of preventing localised overfishing or selective removal of parts of the fish population.
Alonzo S.H. & Mangel M. (2004) The effects of size-selective fisheries on the stock dynamics of and sperm limitation in sex-changing fish. Fishery Bulletin, 102, 1–13.
Dulvy N. & Polunin N. (2004) Using informal knowledge to infer human-induced rarity of a conspicuous reef fish. Animal Conservation, 7, 365–374.
Godoy N, Gelcich S., Vasquez J.A. & Castilla J.C. (2010) Spearfishing to depletion: evidence from temperate reef fishes in Chile. Ecological Applications, 20, 1504–1511.

Key Messages:

Five studies examined the effects of ceasing or prohibiting spearfishing in an area on marine fish populations. Two studies were in the Mediterranean Sea (France, Corsica). One study was in each of the Tasman Sea (Australia) and the Indian Ocean (South Africa). One study was a review of marine reserves around the world.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (4 STUDIES)

Abundance (4 studies): Two of three site comparison studies in the Mediterranean Sea, the Tasman Sea and the Indian Ocean found that prohibiting spearfishing, and line fishing, in protected areas increased the abundances of European seabass and gilthead seabream (years unknown) and of coral reef fish species, compared to protected and unprotected fished areas, after two to seven years. The other study found that fish densities differed between spearfished and non-spearfished areas after 10–12 years, and was affected by depth and/or fish size. A review of reef marine reserves around the world reported that two non-spearfished reserves in the northwestern Atlantic had more snappers and grunts after two years in one, and higher densities of reef fish, including snappers and grunts after 20 years in the other, compared to nearby fished reefs.
Condition (3 studies): Two site comparison studies in the Mediterranean Sea and the Indian Ocean found that prohibiting spearfishing (and linefishing) in marine protected areas resulted in larger European seabass and coral reef fish species, compared to protected and unprotected fished areas, after two to seven years. A review of global reef marine reserves reported that reef fish were larger in one reserve in the northwestern Atlantic that had banned spearfishing for 20 years, compared to nearby fished reefs.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (1 STUDY) 

Commercial catch abundance (1 study): One replicated, site-comparison study in the Mediterranean Sea found that prohibiting spearfishing in specific zones of a marine reserve resulted in higher commercial and recreational fishery catches of targeted common dentex compared to zones that allowed spearfishing and areas outside the reserve after one to three years.

 
 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
