2086: Cease or prohibit shipping
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Shipping (here meaning the movement of any commercial vessels, including cargo ships but also fishing ships) can impact subtidal benthic invertebrates through physical disturbance, introduction of non-native species and pollution. When shipping is undertaken for fishing, it can also lead to additional pressure from the fishing activities. Shipping can be stopped or prohibited in specific areas. For instance, buffer zones around windfarm structures or gas platforms are usually set and exclude any ship from entering (Coates et al. 2016). In these instances, shipping closures also act as fisheries closures. These exclusion zones can either be temporary, such as during the windfarm construction (Roach et al. 2018), or permanent (Bergman et al. 2015). Ceasing shipping activities can potentially benefit subtidal benthic invertebrates by reducing and/or removing this pressure, allowing them to potentially recover over time. A direct consequence of ceasing shipping is the cessation of fishing, and in particular bottom trawling, for which evidence has been summarised under “Threat: Biological Resource Use – Cease or prohibit bottom trawling”.  Evidence for related interventions are summarised under “Threat: Biological resource use – Cease or prohibit all types of fishing” and “Establish temporary fisheries closure”, as well as under “Habitat restoration and creation – Place anthropogenic installations (e.g. windfarms) in an area to act as artificial reefs and reduce the level of fishing”. Evidence related to the creation of Particularly Sensitive Sea Areas which regulate and manage shipping (IMO Resolution A.982(24)) is summarised under “Habitat protection – Designate a Particularly Sensitive Sea Area (PSSA) to regulate impactful maritime activities”.
 
Bergman M.J.N., Ubels S.M., Duineveld G.C.A. & Meesters E.W.G. (2015) Effects of a 5-year trawling ban on the local benthic community in a wind farm in the Dutch coastal zone. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 72, 962–972.
Coates D.A., Kapasakali D.A., Vincx M. & Vanaverbeke J. (2016) Short-term effects of fishery exclusion in offshore wind farms on macrofaunal communities in the Belgian part of the North Sea. Fisheries Research, 179, 131–138.
IMO Assembly Resolution 24/982 (2005) Revised guidelines for the identification and designation of Particularly Sensitive Sea Areas.
Roach M., Cohen M., Forster R., Revill A.S., Johnson M. & Handling editor: Steven Degraer. (2018) The effects of temporary exclusion of activity due to wind farm construction on a lobster (Homarus gammarus) fishery suggests a potential management approach. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 75, 1416–1426.

Key Messages:
 

Three studies examined the effects of ceasing or prohibiting shipping on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations. All studies were in the North Sea (Belgium, Germany, Netherlands).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Overall community composition (1 study): One site comparison study in the North Sea found that areas closed to shipping developed different overall invertebrate community compositions compared to areas where shipping occurred.
Overall species richness/diversity (1 study): One site comparison study in the North Sea found that areas closed to shipping did not develop different overall invertebrate species richness and diversity compared to areas where shipping occurred.

POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Overall abundance (2 studies): Two site comparison studies (one before-and-after) in the North Sea found that areas closed to shipping had similar overall invertebrate abundance and biomass compared to areas where shipping occurred.
Overall abundance (2 studies): Two site comparison studies (one before-and-after) in the North Sea found that areas closed to shipping had similar overall invertebrate abundance and biomass compared to areas where shipping occurred.

OTHER (2 STUDIES)

Overall community energy flow (1 study): One before-after, site comparison study in the North Sea found that after closing an area to shipping, invertebrate community energy flow did not change, but it increased in nearby areas where shipping occurred.
Species energy flow (1 study): One before-and-after, site comparison study in the North Sea found that closing an area to shipping had mixed effects on species-level energy flow.

 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
