1509: Provide monetary benefits to local communities for sustainably managing their forest and its wildlife (e.g. REDD, employment)
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Monetary benefits can be provided to local communities in exchange for their conservation support and may include income generated through craft or other product sales, employment as anti-poaching guards, research assistants or tourist guides, or payment through initiatives to ‘Reduce Carbon Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation’ (REDD). REDD and REDD+ (extends REDD by conserving forest biodiversity) provide payments to developing country governments to incentivize engagement in conserving their forest ecosystems with the aim to slow down climate change and protect biodiversity (Gardner et al. 2012).
            Providing non-monetary benefits in exchange for conservation support is discussed under ‘Provide non-monetary benefits to local communities for sustainably managing their forest and its wildlife (e.g. better education, infrastructure development)’.
 
Gardner T.A., Burgess N.D., Aguilar-Amuchastegui N., Barlow J., Berenguer E., Clements T., Danielsen F., Ferreira J., Foden W., Kapos V., Khan S.M., Leesm A.C., Parry L., Roman-Cuesta R.M., Schmitt C.B., Strange N., Theilade I. & Vieira I.C.G. (2012) A framework for integrating biodiversity concerns into national REDD+ programmes. Biological Conservation, 154, 61–71.

Key Messages:

One before-and-after study in Belize found that numbers of black howler monkeys increased by 138% over 13 years after local communities received monetary benefits, alongside other interventions.
One before-and-after study in the Republic of Congo found that most central chimpanzees reintroduced to an area where local communities received monetary benefits, alongside other interventions, survived over five years.
One before-and-after study in Rwanda, Uganda and the Democratic Republic of Congo found that numbers of mountain gorillas declined by 28% over 41 years despite the implementation of development projects in nearby communities, alongside other interventions.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Primate Conservation
Description: Primate Synopsis
