2693: Set catch limits or quotas for non-targeted commercial catch
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Fishing catch limits (sometimes called quotas) set a maximum limit on the seasonal or annual quantity of fish that can be caught by a vessel in a given area or fishery and may apply to one or more species. One such type of quota (termed individual transferable quota or ITQ) is used to restrict the overall amount of fish a fishing fleet can catch. As the name suggests, transferable quotas can be bought, sold or leased between vessels. However, another type of quota (termed individual vessel bycatch quota or ITBQ) can be implemented. Unlike ITQs, ITBQs are not transferable and put a limit on the unwanted/discarded proportion of fish a vessel can catch that isn’t retained for market (fish may not be kept for market for a variety of reasons, including the species being of no value and/or target species that are undersized or exceed the quota). They aim to reduce unwanted catches of fish by not only limiting overall fishing mortality, but by also encouraging active avoidance of unwanted catch by fishers that may have to stop fishing once their non-target quota is reached (O’Keefe et al. 2014).
O’Keefe C.E., Cadrin S.X. & Stokesbury D.E. (2014) Evaluating effectiveness of time/area closures, quotas/caps, and fleet communications to reduce fisheries bycatch. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 71, 1286–1297.

Key Messages:

Two studies examined the effects of setting catch limits or quotas for non-targeted commercial fish species on marine fish populations. One review was in the North Atlantic and Pacific Oceans and one study was in the Pacific Ocean (Canada). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (2 STUDIES)

Reduction of unwanted catch (2 studies): One review in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans found that setting catch limits or quotas for non-commercially targeted fish reduced unwanted catch in two of three cases. One before-and-after study in the Pacific Ocean found that catch limits for non-target commercial species reduced the amount of unwanted halibut, but a previous quota system based on the whole catch (individual transferrable quotas) did not.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
