3832: Retain connectivity between habitat patches 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Habitat connectivity is important for enabling animals to colonize new sites, and can be important for the persistence of a population which exists in fragmented sites across a landscape (Johansson et al. 2017, van Langevelde & Wynhoff 2009). Small habitat patches are more likely to be occupied if they are located close to larger, occupied patches (Sinclair 2002, Thomas & Harrison 1992). Fragmented habitats attract fewer butterflies than more intact habitats (Summerville & Crist 2001), and retaining connectivity may increase habitat use by butterflies and moths.
For studies on creating habitat corridors, see “Habitat restoration and creation – Restore or create habitat connectivity”.
Johansson V., Knape J. & Franzen M. (2017) Population dynamics and future persistence of the clouded Apollo butterfly in southern Scandinavia: The importance of low intensity grazing and creation of habitat patches. Biological Conservation, 206, 120–131.
Sinclair L.J. (2002) Distribution and conservation requirements of Notoreas sp., an unnamed Geometrid moth on the Taranaki coast, North Island, New Zealand. New Zealand Journal of Zoology, 29, 311–322.
Summerville K.S. & Crist T.O. (2001) Effects of experimental habitat fragmentation on patch use by butterflies and skippers (Lepidoptera). Ecology, 82, 1360–1370.
Thomas C.D. & Harrison S. (1992) Spatial dynamics of a patchily distributed butterfly species. Journal of Animal Ecology, 61, 437–446.
van Langevelde F. & Wynhoff I. (2009) What limits the spread of two congeneric butterfly species after their reintroduction: quality or spatial arrangement of habitat? Animal Conservation, 12, 540–548.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of retaining connectivity between habitat patches. One study was in each of the USA, the Netherlands and Estonia.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, paired, site comparison study in Estonia found that well connected cleared patches within a woodland had a similar species richness of butterflies to isolated cleared patches.

POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (2 STUDIES)

Use (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the Netherlands found that low quality habitat patches which were well connected were more likely to retain Alcon large blue populations than less well connected patches, but connectivity did not affect occupancy of high quality patches.
Behaviour change (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the USA found that common buckeye were more likely to colonize farther away habitat patches if they were released on corridors of suitable habitat than if released in unsuitable habitat, but there was no difference when released close to habitat patches.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
