1780: Slow down input water to allow more time for pollutants to be removed
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Polluted water entering a peatland could be slowed down, allowing more time for natural breakdown or removal of pollutants before the water reaches the peatland. This could be facilitated by making input channels longer (e.g. Kooijman et al. 2016) or building a dam in the input channels (e.g. Bootsma et al. 2002). This intervention is mainly relevant to fens and fen meadows, which are fed by inputs of ground water. Bogs and tropical peat swamps are mainly fed by inputs of rainfall.
Key peatland types for which this action may be appropriate: bogs, fens/fen meadows, tropical peat swamps.
Related actions: clean waste water before it enters the environment; divert/replace source(s) of polluted input water.
Bootsma M.C., van den Broek T., Barendregt A. & Beltman B. (2002) Rehabilitation of acidified floating fens by addition of buffered surface water. Restoration Ecology, 10, 112–121.
Kooijman A.M., Cusell C., Mettrop I.S. & Lamers L.P.M. (2016) Recovery of target bryophytes in floating rich fens after 25 yr of inundation by base-rich surface water with lower nutrient contents. Applied Vegetation Science, 19, 53–65.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects, on peatland vegetation, of slowing down input water to allow more time for pollutants to be removed. The study was in a fen.
Characteristic plants (1 study): One before-and-after study in a floating fen in the Netherlands found that after input water was rerouted on a longer path (along with other interventions to reduce pollution), cover of mosses characteristic of low nutrient levels increased.
Vegetation structure (1 study): The same study found that after input water was rerouted on a longer path (along with other interventions to reduce pollution), vascular plant biomass decreased.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
