3500: Install barriers along roads/railways 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Wildlife barriers aim to prevent animals from crossing roads. They are typically wire mesh fences running parallel to the road. Although fencing may protect wildlife from traffic, it should not create an absolute barrier that prevents migration, isolates populations, fragments habitat, causes injuries, or traps reptiles (e.g. Barton & Kinkead 2005, Wilson & Topham 2009, Kapfer & Paloski 2011, Ferronato et al. 2014). Wildlife fencing is therefore usually combined with safe crossing opportunities such as wildlife underpasses and overpasses (see Install overpasses over roads/railways and Install tunnels/culverts/underpasses under roads/railways).
Studies included here are those that specifically assess barrier effectiveness, sometimes in combination with other collision reduction actions, but not where effects of fencing cannot be separated from effects of road underpasses. For these interventions combined, see Install barriers and crossing structures along roads/railways.
Barton C. & Kinkead K. (2005) Do erosion control and snakes mesh? Journal of Soil and Water Conservation, 60, 33A–35A.
Wilson J.S. & Topham S.E.T.H. (2009) The negative effects of barrier fencing on the desert tortoise (Gopherus agassizii) and non-target species: is there room for improvement. Contemporary Herpetology, 3, 1–4.
Kapfer J.M. & Paloski R.A. (2011) On the threat to snakes of mesh deployed for erosion control and wildlife exclusion. Herpetological Conservation and Biology, 6, 1–9.
Ferronato B.O., Roe J.H. & Georges A. (2014) Reptile bycatch in a pest-exclusion fence established for wildlife reintroductions. Journal for Nature Conservation, 22, 577–585.

Key Messages:

Seven studies evaluated the effects of installing barriers along roads/railways on reptile populations. Six studies were in the USA and one was in Canada.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Survival (3 studies): One before-and-after study in the USA found that following installation of a barrier fence, along with creating artificial nest mounds on the non-road side of the fence, and actively moving turtles off the road, fewer turtles were found dead on the road. One before-and-after study in the USA found that following installation of a roadside barrier with nest boxes along with a warning sign, fewer female diamondback terrapins were killed while crossing the road compared to before installation. One study in Canada found that dead snakes were found in the vicinity of a barrier fence up to 11 years after it was installed.

BEHAVIOUR (4 STUDIES)

Use (4 studies): One controlled, before-and-after study in the USA found that following installation of a roadside barrier with nest boxes, fewer diamond-backed terrapin crossed the road compared to before installation. One replicated study in the USA found that after installing barriers, diamondback terrapins laid more nests on the marsh-side of the fence than on the road-side. The study also found that terrapins were less likely to breach barriers with smaller gaps at the bottom. One replicated study in the USA found that desert tortoises were effectively blocked by a concrete barrier. One replicated study in the USA found that taller fences were better at excluding painted and snapping turtles than lower ones.
Behaviour change (1 study): One replicated study in the USA found that desert tortoises interacted less with solid compared to non-solid barriers.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
