2692: Establish handling and release protocols in non-recreational fisheries
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Releasing alive unwanted animals from fishing catches back into the sea helps reduce the ecosystem impacts of fisheries (Raby et al. 2018). There is a presumption that a released animal is likely to behave normally and survive, but some captured fish show signs of lethargy before release (Davis 2000). Lethargic fish are at risk of reduced survival and may be more prone to predation by other marine animals and seabirds upon release (Broadhurst 1998). Adopting handling and release protocols which may improve vitality of returned fish would reduce the likelihood of their post-release predation. Efficient handling and release methods may also reduce fish injuries and any impacts of exposure of fish to the air. The minimising of both of these factors may help improve survival.
For related interventions, see ‘Handling of catch’.
Broadhurst M.K. (1998) Bottlenose dolphins, Tursiops truncatus, removing by-catch from prawn-trawl codends during fishing in New South Wales, Australia. Marine Fisheries Review, 60, 9–14.
Davis M.W. (2010) Fish stress and mortality can be predicted using reflex impairment. Fish and Fisheries, 11, 1–11.
Raby G.D., Messmer V., Tobin A.J., Hoey A.S., Jutfelt F., Sundin, J., Cooke S.J. & Clark T.D. (2018) Swim for it: effects of simulated fisheries capture on the post-release behaviour of four Great Barrier Reef fishes. Fisheries Research, 206, 129–137.

Key Messages:

Two studies examined the effects of establishing handling and release protocols in non-recreational fisheries on marine fish populations. One study was in the Atlantic Ocean (West Africa) and one was in the South Pacific Ocean (Australia). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Survival (1 study): One study in the Atlantic Ocean reported that tracked whale sharks released from purse seines using an enhanced protocol survived for at least 21 days, and post-release movements appeared normal.

BEHAVIOUR (2 STUDIES)

Behaviour change (2 studies): One study in the Pacific Ocean found that after release protocols (minimal handling and air exposure), reef fish returned more quickly to a reef or the seabed after release, compared to higher stress handling and longer air exposure. One study in the Atlantic Ocean reported that the post-release movements of tracked whale sharks released from purse seines using an enhanced protocol appeared normal.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
