3402: Sow or plant nurse plants (alongside seeding/planting of grassland species)
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Nurse plants are plants which are thought to aid the growth of other species by providing relatively benign conditions below their canopy. Examples of these altered conditions may include increases in moisture and nutrients, and decreases in temperature and damage from herbivores (de Toledo Castanho & Prado 2014). Combining the planting or sowing of seeds of nurse plants with that of focal plants may help to increase focal plant survival and growth. For studies that sow seeds of nurse plants only, see ‘Sow seeds of nurse plants’.
de Toledo Castanho, C. & Prado, P.I. (2014) Benefit of shading by nurse plant does not change along a stress gradient in a coastal dune. PLOS ONE, 9, e105082.

Key Messages:

Four studies examined the effects of sowing or planting nurse plants alongside seeding/planting grassland species on grassland vegetation. Two studies were in Europe, one study was in the USA and one was in Kenya.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY (1 STUDY)

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Slovenia found that sowing a seed mix containing nurse species resulted in a community composition that was less similar to the target community when compared to sowing a seed mix that did not contain nurse species.
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Slovenia found that sowing a seed mix containing nurse species did not increase species richness compared to sowing a seed mix that did not contain nurse species.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE (1 STUDY)

Grass abundance (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in the USA found that sowing seeds of nurse plants alongside that of grassland species did not change grass abundance.
Forb abundance (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in the USA found that sowing seeds of nurse plants alongside that of grassland species did not change forb abundance.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (2 STUDIES)

Germination/Emergence (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Spain found that sowing seeds under nurse plants increased seed germination.
Survival (2 studies): One of two replicated, controlled studies (one of which was randomized and paired) in Kenya and Spain found that sowing seeds or planting under nurse plants increased survival of planted plants. The other study found that sowing seeds under nurse plants initially increased seedling survival, but there was no difference in survival after two to three years.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Grassland Conservation
Description: Grassland Synopsis
