2136: Use a square mesh instead of a diamond mesh codend on trawl nets
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Trawling is a method of fishing that involves pulling a fishing net (trawl) through the water behind one or more boats. Trawl nets can catch a considerable number of unwanted organisms, including non-commercially targeted species and organisms under the legal-size limit. Nets are traditionally made of diamond-shaped mesh throughout, including at the codend. To reduce the amount of unwanted organisms caught, a codend made of square mesh can be used instead of diamond mesh, with the aim to allow smaller unwanted organisms to escape, while retaining the commercially targeted ones (Broadhurst et al. 2010).
Evidence related to the use of modified codend in combination with a mesh panel (“bycatch reduction device”) or a grid (“turtle excluder device”) are summarised under “Threat: Biological resource use – Fit one or more mesh escape panels/windows to trawl nets and use a square mesh instead of a diamond mesh codend” and “Fit one or more soft, semi-rigid, or rigid grids or frames to trawl nets and use a codend of different mesh geometry or size”. Evidence related to other codend modifications are summarised under “Threat: Biological resource use – Use a larger mesh codend”.
 
Broadhurst M.K., Millar R.B. & Brand C.P. (2010) Diamond-vs. square-mesh codend selectivity in southeastern Australian estuarine squid trawls. Fisheries Research, 102, 276–285.

Key Messages:

One study examined the effects of using a square mesh instead of a diamond mesh codend on trawl nets on unwanted catch of subtidal benthic invertebrate populations. The study was in the English Channel (UK).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Unwanted catch abundance (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in the English Channel found that a trawl net with a square mesh codend caught less non-commercial unwanted invertebrates in one of two areas, and similar amounts in the other area, compared to a standard diamond mesh codend.

OTHER (1 STUDY)

Commercial catch abundance (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in the English Channel found that a trawl net with a square mesh codend caught similar amounts of commercially targeted fish species in two areas, and that in one of two areas it caught more commercially important shellfish, compared to a standard diamond mesh codend.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
