3969: Use motor bar mowers rather than rotary mowers
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
In productive grasslands, cutting or mowing is used to harvest vegetation, such as for hay or silage, but the process kills or injures the eggs and caterpillars of butterflies and moths living within the grassland (Humbert et al. 2010). However, the mortality of individuals may depend on the equipment used for mowing. For example, mechanized tractor-pulled rotary mowers may have a larger impact than hand-pushed bar mowers (Humbert et al. 2010). Using a different type of mower may increase butterfly and moth survival.
Humbert J.Y., Ghazoul J., Sauter G.J. & Walter T. (2010) Impact of different meadow mowing techniques on field invertebrates. Journal of Applied Entomology, 134, 592–599.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of using motor bar mowers rather than rotary mowers. Both studies were in Switzerland.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in Switzerland found that farms managed with more in-field agri-environment scheme options, including using bar mowers instead of rotary mowers, had a similar species richness of butterflies to farms with fewer agri-environment scheme options.

POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in Switzerland found that farms managed with more in-field agri-environment scheme options, including using bar mowers instead of rotary mowers, had a similar abundance of butterflies to farms with fewer agri-environment scheme options.
Survival (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in Switzerland1 found that fewer large white caterpillars were killed when meadows were harvested using a hand-pushed bar mower than with a tractor-pulled rotary mower.
Condition (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in Switzerland found that fewer wax model caterpillars were damaged when meadows were harvested using a hand-pushed bar mower than with a tractor-pulled rotary mower.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
