2654: Cease or prohibit all (mobile and static) fishing gears that catch bottom (demersal) species
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Fishing gears that target fish or invertebrate species that live and feed mostly on or near the seabed (collectively called demersal or groundfish species) consist of a variety of gears, both mobile and static. Mobile gears include those actively towed on or just above the seabed by vessel, such as most types of trawls and some seine nets, and bottom seine nets pulled or drawn in by hand or vessel. Static gears include those when deployed on or near the bottom such as gillnets and longlines. These fishing gears not only selectively remove target and non-target bottom-dwelling fish species or groups, but some can cause disturbance and damage to sensitive bottom habitats, including those that fish may depend on for activities such as spawning. Ceasing or prohibiting some or all mobile and static fishing gears that catch bottom species in an area may protect demersal fish communities from overexploitation, reduce fishing mortality and help to preserve essential fish habitats.
Evidence for similar interventions relating to the use of different fishing gears to target bottom-dwelling fish are summarized under ‘Cease or prohibit mobile fishing gears that catch bottom (demersal) species and are dragged across the seafloor’, ‘Cease or prohibit fishing shellfish dredging’, ‘Cease or prohibit line fishing’ and ‘Cease or prohibit spearfishing’. See also, ‘Establish long-term fishery closures’ and ‘Establish temporary fishery closures’.

Key Messages:

Three studies examined the effects of ceasing or prohibiting mobile and static fishing gears that catch bottom (demersal) species in an area on marine fish populations. One study was in each of the Greenland Sea (Iceland), the North Pacific Ocean (Canada) and the North Atlantic Ocean (USA/Canada).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Abundance (3 studies): One of three replicated, controlled studies (one paired) in the Greenland Sea, North Pacific Ocean and the North Atlantic Ocean found that an area where fishing gears targeting bottom-dwelling species had been prohibited for 15 years had higher numbers of larger and older cod than openly fished areas. One study found that fish densities in areas closed to mobile and static bottom fish gears (trawls and longlines) for at least 11 years varied between fish species/groups, and also with depth and temperature. The other study found that prohibiting mobile and static bottom fish gears (trawls and hook and line) in protected areas for 2–7 years had no effect on fish densities compared to non-protected areas.
Condition (2 studies): One of two replicated, controlled studies (one paired) in the Greenland Sea and the North Atlantic Ocean found that cod had better growth in areas closed for 5-15 years to mobile and static gears that targeted bottom-dwelling fish, compared to openly fished areas. The other study found that fish size varied between areas closed and open to bottom fish gears (trawls and longlines) and was also affected by depth and temperature.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
