2958: Cut/remove/thin forest plantations: freshwater marshes
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
This action includes clear cutting (felling and removing all trees) and thinning (removal of only some trees) to address the threat from forest plantations (i.e. areas where trees have been deliberately planted, usually after drainage). Large wetland areas have been drained and afforested in the Paraná River Delta, South America (Ceballos et al. 2013) and the Sanjiang Plain, China (Zhang et al. 2014). Removing trees may increase light intensity at the ground surface allowing herbaceous plants to grow (Aschehoug et al. 2015), and may allow the water table to rise somewhat, since water is no longer intercepted or taken up by the trees).
Related actions: Raise water level to restore degraded freshwater marshes; Raise water level to restore/create freshwater marshes from other land uses; Cut large trees/shrubs to maintain or restore disturbance; Use cutting to control problematic large trees/shrubs.
Aschehoug E.T., Sivakoff F.S., Cayton H.L., Morris W.F. & Haddad N.M. (2015) Habitat restoration affects immature stages of a wetland butterfly through indirect effects on predation. Ecology, 96, 1761–1767.
Ceballos D.S., Frangi J. & Jobbágy E.G. (2013) Soil volume and carbon storage shifts in drained and afforested wetlands of the Paraná River Delta. Biogeochemistry, 112, 359‒372.
Zhang B., Chang L., Ni Z., Callaham M.A., Sun X. & Wu D. (2014) Effects of land use changes on winter-active Collembola in Sanjiang Plain of China. Applied Soil Ecology, 83, 51‒58.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of cutting/removing/thinning forest plantations to restore freshwater marshes. The study was in the USA.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Characteristic plant richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the USA reported that the effect of thinning/clearing forest plantations on wetland-characteristic plant species richness depended on soil moisture. After three growing seasons, wetter thinned/cleared sites generally contained more wetland-characteristic plant species than drier thinned/cleared sites or sites that remained afforested.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE
 
VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
