3963: Change type of livestock grazing
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Livestock prefer to eat different plants, and graze at different heights or in different patterns. For example, sheep graze to a uniform height, while cattle leave heavily trampled areas and eat grass in clumps, leaving patches of taller vegetation (Schultz et al. 2008). These grazing patterns encourage different vegetation communities to develop, with different plants dominating. Therefore, changing the type of livestock used to graze grassland may create differences in the butterfly and moth community, with individual species preferring the landscape created by particular grazers.
This action includes studies comparing the use of different types of livestock alone. For studies comparing the use of single and multiple livestock types, see “Use mixed stocking”.
Schultz C.B., Russell C. & Wynn L. (2008) Restoration, reintroduction, and captive propagation for at-risk butterflies: A review of British and American conservation efforts. Israel Journal of Ecology & Evolution, 54, 41–61.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of changing the type of livestock grazing. One study was in each of the UK, Sweden, China and France.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Richness/diversity (2 studies): Two replicated studies (including one paired, site comparison study and one randomized, controlled study) in Sweden and France found that semi-natural grasslands grazed by cattle or horses had a greater species richness of butterflies and burnet moths than grasslands grazed by sheep.

POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Abundance (2 studies): One of two replicated, randomized, controlled studies (including one paired study) in China and France found that semi-natural grasslands grazed by cattle had a higher abundance of butterflies and burnet moths than grasslands grazed by sheep. The other study found that meadow steppe grazed by cattle, goats or sheep for 1–5 years had a similar abundance of butterflies and moths.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Use (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the UK found that a similar proportion of fen meadows were occupied by marsh fritillary caterpillars whether they were managed by cattle, horse or sheep grazing.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
