3947: Manage heathland by cutting
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Heathland, like other open habitats, requires some disturbance to maintain habitat favourable to specialist species of butterflies and moths. Management by cutting is one option for creating this disturbance, but cutting causes a sudden change in the habitat structure, potentially removing nectar resources or injuring or killing eggs, caterpillars or pupae living within the heath (Humbert et al. 2010, Morris 2000). Therefore, the timing and frequency of cutting may be important for avoiding these short-term negative impacts on butterflies and moths (Morris 2000). This action includes studies comparing different cutting regimes, as well as studies comparing cutting to other options for heathland management, such as burning.
For studies on the creation or restoration of heathland or shrubland by either multiple actions (which may include cutting) or where the specific action is not clear, see “Restore or create heathland/shrubland”. For studies on other actions for heathland and shrubland management and restoration, see “Replant native vegetation”, “Employ areas of semi-natural habitat for rough grazing (includes salt marsh, lowland heath, bog, fen)” and “Natural system modifications – Use prescribed fire to maintain or restore disturbance in grasslands or other open habitats”.
Humbert J.Y., Ghazoul J., Sauter G.J. & Walter T. (2010) Impact of different meadow mowing techniques on field invertebrates. Journal of Applied Entomology, 134, 592–599.
Morris M.G. (2000) The effects of structure and its dynamics on the ecology and conservation of arthropods in British grasslands. Biological Conservation, 95, 129–142.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of managing heathland by cutting. Two studies were in the USA1,2 and one was in the UK3.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Abundance (3 studies): One site comparison study in the USA2 found that a pine barren managed for 13 years by mechanical cutting had a higher abundance of Karner blue butterflies than barrens managed by rotational burning or unburned refuges. One before-and-after study in the USA1 found that the abundance of five butterfly species did not change after the management of a pine barren was changed from rotational burning to unintensive cutting. One before-and-after study in the UK3 reported that the abundance of high brown fritillary and small pearl-bordered fritillary increased after scrub cutting, along with tree felling, coppicing and grazing.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
