2119: Modify the design of dredges
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Dredging, for instance for bivalves, normally involves towing a heavy steel frame along the seabed, which negatively impacts subtidal benthic invertebrates directly, due to physical damage and the retention of unwanted invertebrate catch, and indirectly by changes to the seabed structure and topography, such as creating dredge tracks (Currie & Parry 1996). Dredge design can be modified in order to reduce or remove negative impacts on subtidal benthic invertebrates, such as changing the tooth spacing or mesh size, or reducing sediment penetration or bottom-contact (Frandsen et al. 2015). Evidence for other interventions related to the use of dredges are summarised under “Threat: Biological resource use – Cease or prohibit dredging”, “Use lower water pressure during hydraulic dredging”, “Hand harvest instead of using a dredge”, “ Use an otter trawl instead of a dredge”, “Use alternative means of getting mussel seeds rather than dredging from natural mussel beds”, “Use an otter trawl instead of a dredge”, and in “Species management – Cease or prohibit the harvest of scallops”.
 
Currie D.R. & Parry G.D. (1996) Effects of scallop dredging on a soft sediment community: a large-scale experimental study. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 134, 131–150.
 Frandsen R.P., Eigaard O.R., Poulsen L.K., Tørring D., Stage B., Lisbjerg D. & Dolmer P. (2015) Reducing the impact of blue mussel (Mytilus edulis) dredging on the ecosystem in shallow water soft bottom areas. Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems, 25, 162–173

Key Messages:

Six studies examined the effects of modifying the design of dredges on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations. Four were in the North Atlantic Ocean (Portugal) and two were in the Irish Sea (Isle of Man).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Unwanted catch overall composition (1 study): One replicated, controlled, study in the Irish Sea found that a new design of scallop dredge caught a similar species composition of unwanted catch to a traditional dredge.

POPULATION RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Overall abundance (2 studies): One of two controlled studies in the North Atlantic Ocean and in the Irish Sea found that a new dredge design damaged or killed fewer invertebrates left in the sediment tracks following dredging. The other found no difference in total invertebrate abundance or biomass living in or on the sediment tracks following fishing with two dredge designs.
Unwanted catch overall abundance (2 studies): Two controlled studies (one replicated) in the North Atlantic Ocean and the Irish Sea found that a modified or a new design of bivalve dredge caught less unwanted catch compared to traditional unmodified dredges.

Unwanted catch condition (6 studies): Six controlled studies (one replicated and paired, four replicated) in the North Atlantic Ocean and the Irish Sea found that new or modified bivalve dredges damaged or killed similar proportions of unwanted catch (retained and/or escaped) compared to traditional or unmodified designs, three of which also found that they did not reduce the proportion of damaged or dead unwanted crabs (retained and/or escaped).
OTHER (1 study)

Commercial catch abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled, study in the Irish Sea found that a new dredge design caught a similar amount of commercially targeted queen scallops compared to a traditional dredge.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
