2822: Modify fishing pots and traps to exclude mammals
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Marine and freshwater mammals may predate on catches in fishing pots and traps, which can result in mammals being trapped or entangled. Modifying traps to exclude mammals may reduce this risk. Losses to fishers and damage to gear may also be reduced, thereby reducing human-wildlife conflict at wild fisheries. Methods to exclude mammals may include changing the pot/trap configuration, securing pot/trap doors, using strengthened materials, or adding a physical device (sometimes referred to as a ‘Depredation Mitigation Device’) to prevent entry, such as a metal grid or rods.

Key Messages:

Six studies evaluated the effects on marine mammals of modifying fishing pots and traps to exclude mammals. Two studies were in the North Sea (UK, Sweden) and one study was in each of the Indian River Lagoon (USA), the Gulf of Finland (Finland), the Bothnian Sea (Finland), the Indian Ocean (Australia) and the Baltic Sea (Sweden).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (6 STUDIES)

Reduction in entanglements/unwanted catch (2 studies): Two controlled studies (including one replicated study) in the Indian Ocean, and the Baltic Sea and North Sea found that installing steel rods on lobster pots or metal frames on fishing pots reduced the number of Australian sea lion pups or grey seals and harbour seals that entered or became trapped in pots.
Human wildlife conflict (4 studies): Two controlled studies (including one replicated study) in the Bothnian Sea and the North Sea found that installing wire grids or steel bars on fishing trap-nets or bag-nets, along with strengthened netting or other modifications to prevent seal access, reduced damage to salmon catches by seals. One controlled study in the Indian River Lagoon found that one of two methods of securing crab pot doors with a bungee cord reduced the number of common bottlenose dolphin interactions. One controlled study in the Gulf of Finland found that installing wire grids on trap-nets, along with strengthened netting, resulted in higher catches of undamaged salmon but not whitefish, likely due to reduced seal predation.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
