3927: Create beetle banks 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Beetle banks are raised grassy strips running through the centre of arable fields. They were originally designed to enable predatory invertebrates to access the centre of fields as a means of controlling pest species, but the habitat provided may support a range of other invertebrate groups, including butterflies and moths (Thomas et al. 2000).
Thomas S.R., Goulson D. & Holland J.M. (2000) The contribution of beetle banks to farmland biodiversity. Aspects of Applied Biology, 62, 31–38.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of creating raised beetle banks in arable fields. All four were in the UK.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Richness/diversity (2 studies): One replicated, paired, site comparison study in the UK found that beetle banks and field margins managed under agri-environment schemes had a higher species richness of micro-moths, and a similar species richness of macro-moths, than conventionally managed field margins. One replicated, paired, site comparison study in the UK found that the species richness of butterflies on beetle banks was lower than along hedgerows.

POPULATION RESPONSE (4 STUDIES)

Abundance (4 studies): Three replicated, site comparison studies (including one paired study) in the UK found that beetle banks had a similar abundance of caterpillars to field margins, crop fields and a range of other field-edge farmland habitats. One of these studies also found that the abundance of adult butterflies was lower on beetle banks than along hedgerows. One replicated, paired, site comparison study in the UK found that beetle banks and field margins managed under agri-environment schemes had a higher abundance of micro-moths, and a similar abundance of macro-moths, than conventionally managed field margins.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
