3046: Cut large trees/shrubs to maintain or restore disturbance: freshwater marshes
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Disturbance can clear dominant plants (including trees and shrubs), maintain light availability and control nutrient levels – and may maintain vegetation in a desirable and/or species-rich state (Hall et al. 2008; Middleton 2013). Therefore, conservationists sometimes want to actively restore disturbance where it has ceased, or maintain disturbance at a site where it would otherwise be lost.
Large trees and shrubs may need to be managed by cutting individual plants, stems or branches with loppers, saws or chainsaws. These actions are the focus of this section. Afterwards, regrowth of trees and shrubs may be managed by grazing, mowing or herbicide (effects covered elsewhere in synopsis).
Related actions: Use cutting to control problematic large trees/shrubs, whose success is not linked to a change in disturbance regime; Cut/remove/thin forest plantations; Cut/mow herbaceous plants (or small woody plants) to maintain or restore disturbance.
Hall S.J., Lindig-Cisneros R. & Zedler J.B. (2008) Does harvesting sustain plant diversity in Central Mexican wetlands? Wetlands, 28, 776–792.
Middleton B.A. (2013) Rediscovering traditional vegetation management in preserves: trading experiences between cultures and continents. Biological Conservation, 158, 750–760.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of cutting large trees/shrubs to maintain or restore disturbance in freshwater marshes. Three studies were in the USA. One was in Germany.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community types (1 study): One study of a riparian wet meadow in Germany reported changes in the area of plant community types over four years after cutting trees/shrubs (along with grazing).
Community composition (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled, before-and-after study aiming to restore freshwater marshes in the USA found that cutting trees (along with other interventions) significantly affected the overall plant community composition over the following five years.
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One study of a riparian wet meadow in Germany reported that plant species richness increased over four years after cutting trees/shrubs (along with grazing).

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (2 studies): Of two replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after studies in the USA, one found that cutting and removing woody plants from a degraded wet prairie had no significant effect on overall vegetation cover three years later. The other study was in wet patches of a pine forest and found that understory vegetation cover increased more, over one year, where trees were thinned than where they were not thinned.
Characteristic plant abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled, before-and-after study of overgrown freshwater marshes in the USA reported that of 26 plant taxa that became more frequent after cutting trees (along with other interventions), 16 were obligate wetland taxa.
Herb abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in wet patches of a pine forest in the USA found that cover of sedges Carex increased more, over one year, where trees were thinned than where they were not thinned.
Tree/shrub abundance (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study of a wet prairie in the USA found that woody plant cover declined, over three years, in plots where trees/shrubs were cut – but increased in plots where trees/shrubs were not cut. One study of a riparian wet meadow in Germany simply reported that some trees/shrubs regrew over four years after cutting trees/shrubs (along with grazing).
Individual species abundance (1 study): One study quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. The replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study of a wet prairie in the USA found, for example, that cutting trees and shrubs had no significant effect on cover of the dominant herbaceous plant, tussock grass Deschampsia cespitosa, three years later.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (1 study): One site comparison study of a riparian wet meadow in Germany reported that an area in which trees/shrubs were cut back (along with reinstating cattle grazing) contained shorter vegetation than an adjacent unmanaged area.

OTHER

Survival (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in a wet prairie in the USA found that cutting woody plants did not significantly affect their survival in the following year. One study of a riparian wet meadow in Germany simply reported that 20% of black alder Alder glutinosa trees were still alive after being cut back and grazed for four years.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
