3507: Install barriers and crossing structures along roads/railways
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Schemes designed to reduce collisions between vehicles and reptiles may use multiple interventions. Two of the most common ones, installing barrier fencing and providing routes for reptiles to travel underneath or over roads, are often employed within the same scheme. This may entail regular roadside fencing with entrances to underpasses set further back away from the road or fencing may be designed to adjoin the sides of under or overpass entrances. Sometimes, fencing may be installed to form a funnel leading towards under or overpass entrances.
This intervention includes studies where these two actions are in place at the same site. In most studies, all under or overpasses (where there are multiple crossings) are beneath stretches or roads that have barrier fencing. In a minority, just some of the under or overpasses monitored are along stretches with barrier fencing. Studies included use of either conventional fencing, electric fences or other barriers, such as walls. Most studies report solely on the use of crossings or trends in numbers of reptiles killed on roads. There is an absence of studies reporting on wider population-level effects of the presence of these structures.
See Install tunnels/culverts/underpasses under roads/railways or Install overpasses over roads/railways for studies where under or overpasses are either installed without use of barriers or where it is not clear from the study that barriers were installed. See also Install barriers along roads/railways for studies where the specific effect of barriers was evaluated.

Key Messages:

Sixteen studies evaluated the effects of installing barriers and crossing structures along roads/railways on reptile populations. Five studies were in the USA, three were in each of Spain, Australia and Canada and one was in each of France and South Africa.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (8 STUDIES)

Survival (8 studies): Four of seven studies (including one randomized, controlled, before-and-after study and one review) in the USA, Australia, Canada and South Africa found that installing fencing and crossing structures did not reduce road mortalities of reptiles, and in one case the percentage of mortalities may have increased. Two studies found that areas with fencing and crossing structures had fewer road mortalities of turtles and overall reptiles. One study found that reptile road mortalities still occurred in in areas with roadside barrier walls and culverts. One replicated, before-and-after study in Canada found that following installation of tunnels and guide fencing, along with signs for motorists, there were fewer road mortalities of eastern massasauga rattlesnakes.

BEHAVIOUR (12 STUDIES)

Use (12 studies): Six studies (including two replicated studies and one review) in Spain, France, the USA and Australia found that crossing structures with fencing that were not specifically designed for wildlife were used by lizards, snakes, tortoises, turtles and alligators and ophidians. One study also found that the addition of fencing around crossing structures did not affect the number of reptile crossings. Three studies (including one replicated and one before-and-after study and one review) in the USA and Spain found that wildlife crossing structures with fencing were used by gopher tortoises and 12 snake species, American alligators and lacertid lizards. One study also found that an American alligator did not use the wildlife crossing structure. Two before-and-after studies (including one controlled study) in Canada found mixed effects of installing roadside fencing and culverts on road use by turtles and snakes. One replicated study in Spain found that use of different crossing structures depended on species group. One replicated study in Australia found that reptiles used wildlife underpasses or culverts for only 1% of road crossings. One replicated, before-and-after study in Canada found that following installation of tunnels and guide fencing, along with signs for motorists, fewer eastern massasauga rattlesnakes were found crossing the road.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
