3038: Actively manage water level: freshwater marshes
Effectiveness rating: Beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This action involves active, repeated management of the amount of water in wetlands and when it is present, to mimic the natural hydrology of marshes. This may prevent excessively high or low water levels (e.g. during storm surges or droughts), or maintain wet/dry cycles that are a natural feature of many marshes (e.g. Zacharias & Zamperas 2010).
This action will usually involve some kind of water control structure: a valve, gate, sluice or pump. Water level management might aim to: mirror historical water level fluctuations or stability; manage salinity levels; increase sediment inputs; stimulate growth of desirable plant species; and/or create new wetland plant communities. Studies of “moist soil management”, “structural marsh management” and “environmental flows” along river courses all fall within the scope of this action. Caution: When managing water levels in a focal site, the effect on water levels in neighbouring sites should be considered.
Although water levels may be managed to restore or enhance habitats for waterfowl, information on the value of vegetation for waterfowl (e.g. seed production; productivity measured as CO2 exchange rates) is not summarized in this synopsis. Also, this synopsis does not include information on riparian areas that are not clearly marshes or swamps (e.g. riparian forests that require only a brief flood pulse for germination; Taylor et al. 2006).
Related actions: Raise water level to restore degraded marshes or restore/create marshes from other land uses; Lower water level to restore degraded marshes or restore/create marshes from other land uses; Facilitate tidal exchange to restore degraded marshes or restore/create marshes from other land uses; Manage water level to control problematic plants; Actively manage water level to complement planting.
Junk W.J., Piedade M.T.F., Schöngart J., Cohn-Haft M., Adeney J.M. Wittman F. (2011) A classification of major naturally-occurring Amazonian lowland wetlands. Wetlands, 31, 623–640.
Taylor J.P., Smith L.M. & Haukos D.A. (2006) Evaluation of woody plant restoration in the Middle Rio Grande: ten years after. Wetlands, 26, 1151–1160.
Zacharias I. & Zamparas M. (2010) Mediterranean temporary ponds. A disappearing ecosystem. Biodiversity and Conservation, 19, 3827–3834.

Key Messages:

Ten studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of active water level management in freshwater marshes. Eight studies were in the USA. One study was in Cameroon and one study was in the Netherlands.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community composition (1 study): One before-and-after study in the USA found that directly pumping water into drained marshes and wet meadows generated plant communities characteristic of wetter conditions. This change was reversed in some plots when the pump output was moved further away from the focal wetlands.
Relative abundance (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, controlled study of freshwater marshes in the USA reported that irrigated and non-irrigated marshes supported a similar relative abundance of the most common plant species. One before-and-after study on a floodplain in Cameroon found that the relative abundance of some key plant species changed over four years after restoring wet-season flooding. There was also an increase in the cover of perennial relative to annual herbs.
Overall richness/diversity (4 studies): One before-and-after study of a marsh/swamp in the USA found that overall plant diversity was higher in the autumn following a managed flood/drawdown than in the autumn before. Two before-and-after studies of marshes and wet meadows in the USA reported that plant species richness and/or diversity declined over 5–6 years of water level management (fluctuation or water addition). One study in the USA simply reported the number of plant species that colonized a floodplain, over three weeks after lowering the river level.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (3 studies): One study of riparian moist/wet meadows in the USA reported that vascular plant biomass increased in two of three meadow types, over the second year of artificially augmented streamflow. Meanwhile, vascular plant cover declined in two of three meadow types. Two studies in the Netherlands and the USA simply quantified overall vegetation abundance after 1–9 growing seasons of active water level management (sometimes along with other interventions).
Characteristic plant abundance (2 studies): Two before-and-after studies of marshes and wet meadows in the USA reported increases in abundance of some individual wetland- or habitat-characteristic species over 5–6 years of water level management (fluctuation or water addition).
Moss abundance (1 study): One study of riparian moist/wet meadows in the USA reported that moss cover did not significantly change in two of three meadow types, over the second year of artificially augmented streamflow. It declined in the other meadow type.
Individual species abundance (7 studies): Seven studies quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. For example, one before-and-after study of a marsh/swamp in the USA reported mixed effects of a managed flood/drawdown on species cover, including increased cover of Pacific willow Salix lucida and reduced cover of reed canarygrass Phalaris arundinacea. One controlled study of freshwater marshes in the USA found that irrigated marshes developed a greater biomass of pink smartweed Polygonum pensylvanicum, after one growing season, than marshes that were left dry.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Vegetation height (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study of freshwater marshes in the USA reported that four common plant species were taller in irrigated than non-irrigated marshes.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
