2924: Rescue and release stranded or trapped marine and freshwater mammals
Effectiveness rating: Beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Marine and freshwater mammals that are found stranded or trapped without significant injury or impairment may be rescued and released back into the wild. Often this is done more for animal welfare reasons than for species conservation, although for rare species, release of such animals may provide opportunities to augment wild populations. The success of rescuing and releasing mammals can be difficult to judge without long-term survival data. It is also important to note that most studies summarised below have small sample sizes, and that unsuccessful attempts are unlikely to have been reported.
Evidence is summarised below for studies that released trapped or stranded mammals immediately. For studies that rescued and rehabilitated mammals in captivity prior to release, see Rehabilitate and release injured, sick or weak marine and freshwater mammals.

Key Messages:

Eleven studies evaluated the effects of rescuing and releasing stranded or trapped marine and freshwater mammals. Five studies were in the North Atlantic Ocean (USA), two studies were in the Indian Ocean (Tasmania, South Africa), and one study was in each of the South Atlantic Ocean (Brazil), the Cachoeira River estuary (Brazil), the North Pacific Ocean (USA) and the Shannon Estuary (Ireland).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (11 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (2 studies): One review in the North Pacific Ocean found that after rescuing and releasing stranded or trapped Hawaiian monk seals, along with at least seven other interventions to enhance survival, more than a quarter of the seals reproduced. One study in the Shannon Estuary found that a stranded common bottlenose dolphin that was rescued and released was observed with a calf a year later.
Survival (11 studies): Seven studies (including one review) in the North Atlantic Ocean, Indian Ocean and the Shannon Estuary found that 17–100% of rescued and released Atlantic white-sided dolphins, short-beaked common dolphins, common bottlenose dolphins, long-finned pilot whales, short-finned pilot whales, and Cape fur seals survived during post-release monitoring periods, which ranged in length from three weeks to three years. Three studies in the South Atlantic Ocean, the Cachoeira estuary and the Indian Ocean found that a trapped rough-toothed dolphin, two stranded tucuxi dolphins and seven stranded sperm whales were successfully rescued and released, although long-term survival was not reported. One review in the North Pacific Ocean found that rescuing and releasing stranded or trapped Hawaiian monk seals, along with at least seven other interventions to enhance survival, resulted in more than a quarter of the seals surviving.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
