3915: Pay farmers to cover the costs of conservation measures (as in agri-environment schemes or conservation incentives) 
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Implementing conservation actions can be costly for landowners, either because of the direct management costs or due to the loss of income from other possible land uses, such as farming. Payments may be offered by Governments or inter-Governmental schemes to compensate landowners for these costs, and encourage more wildlife-friendly habitat management and creation on private land. In Europe, agri-environment schemes (AES) are an integral part of the European Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) and Member States devise their own AES prescriptions to suit their agricultural economies and environmental contexts. In the United States, these are often called conservation incentive payments and are mostly implemented through the Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018 (known as the Farm Bill, for example Kleintjes Neff & Mader 2013). Most schemes focus on reducing the intensity of farm management, or creating other habitats within the farmed landscape, but payments may also be made for managing other habitats such as woodland (in the USA often called agroforestry) or heathland on private land. As well as attempting to provide more favourable habitat, coordinated planning of the schemes may be important to ensure that a variety of habitats are created across the farmed landscape throughout the year.
This intervention includes any studies where landowners were paid to carry out an action in any habitat, but excludes studies testing AES options which were conducted outside of an AES (e.g. on research farms or nature reserves). Since AES represent many different specific interventions relevant to conservation, where a study’s results can be clearly assigned to a specific intervention, the study is also summarized in the appropriate section. This section, meanwhile, includes evidence about the success of agri-environment or conservation incentive policies overall.
Kleintjes Neff P. & Mader E. (2013) CRP-SAFE for Karner Blue butterflies: Recommendations for Wisconsin landowners and conservationists. The Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation report.

Key Messages:

Thirty-two studies evaluated the effects of paying farmers to cover the costs of conservation measures on butterflies and moths. Eighteen studies were in the UK, eight were in Switzerland two were in Finland, and one was in each of Sweden, the Czech Republic, the USA and Germany.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (18 STUDIES)

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Switzerland found that the community composition of butterflies on grasslands that farmers were paid to manage for wildlife was similar to intensively managed grasslands.
Richness/diversity (19 studies): Twelve of 15 studies (including eight controlled, one before-and-after and five site comparison studies) in Switzerland, the United Kingdom and Sweden found that the species richness or diversity of butterflies and moths on grassland, field margins, wildflower strips or whole farms managed under agri-environment schemes was higher than on conventional fields or farms. The other three studies found that the species richness of butterflies and micro-moths on grassland, field margins, wildflower strips or whole farms managed under agri-environment schemes was similar to conventional fields or farms. One of two replicated, site comparison studies in Switzerland found that the species richness of butterflies was higher in landscapes with a greater proportion of land managed under agri-environment schemes than in landscapes with a smaller proportion of agri-environment schemes, but the other study found that species richness of butterflies was similar on individual farms with more land managed under agri-environment schemes than on farms with smaller areas of agri-environment schemes. One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that the species richness of butterflies on grassland sown under a conservation incentive program was similar to that on native prairie. One replicated, site comparison study in Finland found that the species richness of butterflies and day-flying moths on grassland managed under an agri-environment scheme was lower than on abandoned, unmanaged grassland.

POPULATION RESPONSE (27 STUDIES)

Abundance (27 studies): Seventeen of 19 studies (including seven controlled studies, one replicated, site comparison study, two before-and-after studies, and eight site comparison studies) in the UK, Sweden, Switzerland and Germany found that the abundance of butterflies and moths overall, and of specific species of butterflies or moths, in woodland, grassland, field margins, wildflower strips or whole farms managed under agri-environment schemes was higher than in unmanaged woodland or conventional fields or farms. The other two studies found that the abundance of butterflies and macro-moths on field margins managed under agri-environment schemes was similar to conventional margins. Three of four replicated studies (including one controlled and three site comparison studies) in the UK and Switzerland found that the abundance of butterflies was higher on farms or in landscapes with a higher proportion of land managed under agri-environment schemes than in areas with less land in agri-environment schemes. The other study found that the abundance of some species was higher, but others were lower, on farms with enhanced agri-environment management compared to simple management. Three studies (including one before-and-after and two replicated, site comparison studies) in Finland and the Czech Republic found that grassland grazed or restored under agri-environment scheme prescriptions had a lower abundance of all but three butterfly and day-flying moth species compared to unmanaged grassland, and that Danube clouded yellow abundance declined after agri-environment scheme mowing was initiated on abandoned grasslands. One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that the abundance of butterflies on grassland sown under a conservation incentive program was lower than on native prairie.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
