2935: Educate the public to improve behaviour towards marine and freshwater mammals
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Marine and freshwater mammals face a range of threats from humans. This may include exploitation through hunting or persecution if the mammal is perceived as a threat or nuisance. Education programmes may be designed to educate the public about the importance of marine and freshwater mammals and their conservation to reduce behaviours that are a threat to mammals and to encourage positive behaviours. This may involve a variety of media from broadcasting and social media through to educational events. This may also include educating the public during mammal watching tours. However, careful implementation may be required as unregulated tours can cause considerable disturbance to marine and freshwater mammals (Zapetis et al. 2017).
See also Involve local communities in marine and freshwater mammal conservation projects.
Zapetis M.E., Samuelson M.M., Acosta N. & Kuczaj S. (2017) Evaluation of a developing ecotourism industry: whale watching in the Gulf of Tribugá, Colombia. International Journal of Comparative Psychology, 30.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects of educating the public to improve behaviour towards marine and freshwater mammals. One study was in each of the North Atlantic Ocean (USA), the Sundarbans mangroves (Bangladesh) and the South Pacific Ocean (Peru).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (3 STUDIES)

Change in human behaviour (3 studies): Three before-and-after studies in the North Atlantic Ocean, the Sundarbans mangroves and the South Pacific Ocean found that after educational whale-watching tours or an educational exhibition, participants were more willing to change their behaviour to support marine conservation, to donate money to marine conservation, or to cut their fishing nets to save entangled dolphins.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
