3657: Use prescribed burning in combination with grazing 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Prescribed burning may be used to reduce the chance of more extensive and damaging wildfires and to maintain and restore habitats historically subject to occasional wildfires. Using prescribed burning alongside grazing may further alter vegetation height and cover as well as the abundance of certain plants and the diversity of plant communities.
For studies that assess these actions separately see Use prescribed burning and Habitat restoration and creation – Manage vegetation using livestock grazing.

Key Messages:

Five studies evaluated the effects of using prescribed burning in combination with grazing on reptile populations. Two studies were in the USA, two were in Australia and one was in Argentina.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Richness/diversity (3 studies): One of two studies (including one site comparison study and one replicated, controlled, before-and-after study) in Argentina and the USA found that areas that were burned in combination with grazing had similar reptile species richness and diversity compared to areas not burned or grazed for 3–12 years. The other study found that areas that were burned in combination with grazing had higher species richness than lightly grazed or unmanaged areas and similar richness compared to areas that were burned only. One before-and-after study in the USA found that an area with annual prescribed burning combined with intensive early-season grazing had similar reptile species richness compared to when it was managed by alternate year prescribed burning with season-long grazing.

POPULATION RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Abundance (3 studies): Two site comparison studies (including one replicated study) in Australia and Argentina found that that burning in combination with grazing had mixed effects on the abundance of reptile species. One replicated, randomized, controlled study in Australia found that areas where invasive para grass was removed by burning in combination with grazing had similar overall reptile and amphibian abundance compared to areas that were only burned or unmanaged. The study also found that the abundance of delicate skinks was lower in areas that were burned and grazed compared to those that were unmanaged.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
