3215: Reprofile/relandscape: freshwater swamps
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
This action involves large-scale reprofiling or landscaping, aiming to restore or create swamps. This includes excavating large basins (&gt;8 ha or &gt;280 m diameter), moving soil/sediment from the site into levees/berms/impoundments, removing unnatural hills or levees, filling in deep depressions and altering the elevation/slope of coastal areas. In other words, this action aims to restore wetland hydrology (how wet the soil is and when it is wet/flooded) by adjusting the ground surface relative to the water table or sea. Soil from existing marshes or swamps might be imported as part of relandscaping efforts, but we consider this as a separate action.
Caution: Heavy machinery is usually needed for this intervention. Heavy vehicles can churn and compress wetland soils (Campbell et al. 2002).
Related actions: Raise water level to restore degraded swamps; Raise water level to restore/create swamps from other land uses; Facilitate tidal exchange to restore degraded swamps; Facilitate tidal exchange to restore/create swamps from other land uses; Excavate pools; Create mounds or hollows; Remove surface soil/sediment; Deposit soil/sediment to form physical habitat structure; Reprofile/relandscape before planting.
Campbell D.A., Cole C.A. & Brooks R.P. (2002) A comparison of created and natural wetlands in Pennsylvania, USA. Wetlands Ecology and Management, 10, 41–49.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of reprofiling or relandscaping to restore or create freshwater swamps. Both studies were in the USA.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that swamps created by reprofiling uplands (along with planting trees/shrubs) contained a similar proportion of tree species in different plant groups, after 7–11 years, to nearby swamps recovering naturally from logging.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that swamps created by reprofiling uplands (along with planting trees/shrubs) had similar ground and canopy cover, after 7–11 years, to nearby swamps recovering naturally from logging.
Herb abundance (1 study): One study in a former firing range in the USA simply quantified herb cover approximately 1–2 years after reprofiling the site (and planting trees/shrubs).
Tree/shrub abundance (1 study): One study in a former firing range in the USA simply quantified woody plant cover approximately 1–2 years after reprofiling the site (and planting trees/shrubs).

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Visual obstruction (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that swamps created by reprofiling uplands (along with planting trees/shrubs) had less horizontal vegetation cover, after 7–11 years, than nearby swamps recovering naturally from logging.
Height (1 study): The same study found that swamps created by reprofiling uplands (along with planting trees/shrubs) contained shorter woody vegetation, after 7–11 years, than nearby swamps recovering naturally from logging. Herbaceous vegetation, however, was of similar height in both created and naturally recovering swamps.
Basal area (1 study): The same study found that swamps created by reprofiling uplands (along with planting trees/shrubs) had a lower vegetation basal area, after 7–11 years, than nearby swamps recovering naturally from logging.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
