3671: Remove or control predators using lethal controls: Sea turtles
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Predators can drive declines or local extinctions of vulnerable reptile species. Non-native predators may be a particular problem for native reptiles that lack sufficient predator avoidance behaviours. Native predators can also threaten populations of reptiles that persist in low numbers. Removing or controlling predators, especially native predators, for the benefit of their wild prey species can be a controversial management strategy. Nonetheless, there is potential for such management to lead to increases in the abundance, survival or reproductive success for species of conservation concern.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians.
See also: Remove or control predators using fencing and/or aerial nets and Remove or control predators by relocating them.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects of removing or controlling predators using lethal controls on sea turtle populations. All four studies were in the USA.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (4 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (4 studies): Two before-and-after studies (including one controlled study) in the USA found that on islands where raccoons and feral pigs or only feral pigs were eradicated, fewer loggerhead and loggerhead and green turtle nests were predated than before predator control began. One replicated, randomized, controlled study in the USA found that controlling raccoons on short sections of a beach resulted in similar predation of loggerhead turtle nests compared to in sections of the beach with no control. One before-and-after study in the USA found that disruptions to a programme controlling raccoons and armadillos resulted in more predation of loggerhead, leatherback and green turtle nests.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
