1565: Involve local community in primate research and conservation management  
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
This intervention involves local communities in the management of natural primate habitat and/or primate research in an attempt to reduce unsustainable resource use and habitat degradation. A correlative study by Stokes et al. (2010) found that sites with a higher conservation management status in the Congo Basin in northern Republic of Congo were more densely populated by elephants Loxodonta africana, gorillas Gorilla gorilla gorilla and chimpanzees Pan troglodytes troglodytes. In this case, wildlife management strategies included, among others, community-based conservation and management of wildlife and other natural resources.
 
Stokes E.J., Strindberg S., Bakabana P.C., Elkan P.W., Iyenguet F.C., Madzoke B., Malanda G.A.F., Mowawa B.S., Moukoumbou C., Ouakabadio F.K. & Rainey H.J. (2010) Monitoring great ape and elephant abundance at large spatial scales: measuring effectiveness of a conservation landscape. PLoS ONE, 5, e10294.

Key Messages:

One before-and-after study in Uganda found that a reintroduced chimpanzee repeatedly returned to human settlements despite the involvement of local communities in the reintroduction project, alongside other interventions.
One before-and-after study in Belize found that numbers of black howler monkeys increased over 13 years while local communities were involved in the management of the sanctuary, alongside other interventions.
One before-and-after study in Rwanda, Uganda and the Democratic Republic of Congo found that mountain gorilla numbers decreased over 41 years despite the implementation of an environmental education programme, alongside other interventions.
One before-and-after study in Cameroon found that incidents of gorilla poaching stopped after the implementation of a community-based monitoring scheme, alongside other interventions.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Primate Conservation
Description: Primate Synopsis
