3026: Raise water level to restore degraded freshwater marshes
Effectiveness rating: Trade off between benefit and harms
Key Messages:

Five studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of raising the water level to restore degraded freshwater marshes. There were three studies in the USA and one in each of the Netherlands and Japan.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall extent (1 study): One before-and-after study of a floodplain in Japan reported that the area covered by marsh vegetation was higher five years after dechannelizing a river than 10 years before.
Community types (1 study): One before-and-after study of a floodplain in Japan reported changes in the area covered by different marsh plant communities over five years after dechannelizing a river compared to 10 years before.
Community composition (1 study): One replicated study of dune slacks in the Netherlands reported changes in the overall plant community composition after stopping groundwater extraction (along with other interventions).
Overall richness/diversity (2 studies): One replicated, site comparison study of dune slacks in the Netherlands reported that overall plant species richness was greater in restored slacks (groundwater extraction stopped five years previously, along with other interventions) than in mature unmanaged slacks. One replicated, before-and-after study of floodplain marshes in the USA reported that total plant species richness tended to be lower over nine years after raising the water table than before, but that there was no significant difference for diversity.
Characteristic plant richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated study of dune slacks in the Netherlands simply quantified the richness of characteristic plant species – typical of dune slacks or nutrient-rich marshes – over five years after stopping groundwater extraction (along with other interventions).

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (3 studies): One replicated, before-and-after study of floodplain marshes in the USA reported that total vegetation cover tended to be lower over nine years after raising the water table than before. One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study of freshwater marshes in the USA found that damming to raise the water table prevented increases in understory vegetation cover over the following year. One replicated study of dune slacks in the Netherlands simply quantified total vegetation over five years after stopping groundwater extraction (along with other interventions). Cover never exceeded 50%.
Herb abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study of freshwater marshes in the USA found that damming to raise the water table had no significant effect on cover of sedges Carex There were similar increases in dammed and undammed marshes over one year.
Characteristic plant abundance (1 study): One replicated, before-and-after study of floodplain marshes in the USA reported changes in the cover of wetland- and habitat-characteristic plant species over nine years after raising the water table.
Individual species abundance (3 studies): Three studies quantified the effect of this intervention on the abundance of individual plant species. For example, one replicated, before-and-after study in the USA reported that rewetted floodplain marshes became dominated by a non-native wetland shrub, approximately 4–9 years after raising the water table. One replicated study of a freshwater wetland in the USA reported that the effects of reflooding on the density of emergent plant species depended on the species and water level.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
