3320: Transplant wetland soil before/after planting non-woody plants: freshwater wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of transplanting wetland soil to freshwater wetlands planted with emergent, non-woody plants. One study was in the USA and one was in Canada.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study of created freshwater marshes in the USA found that those amended with marsh soil developed plant communities characteristic of wetter conditions than unamended marshes. Most marshes had also been planted. All were ≥5 years old.
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): The same study found that marshes amended with marsh soil had similar (dry season) or lower (wet season) plant species richness and diversity to unamended marshes. Most marshes had also been planted. All were ≥5 years old.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE                

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study of created freshwater marshes in the USA reported that amongst planted marshes, adding marsh soil had no significant effect on overall vegetation cover or biomass, after ≥5 years.
Characteristic plant abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study of created freshwater marshes in the USA reported that amongst planted marshes, those also amended with marsh soil had greater cover of wetland-characteristic plants than unamended marshes, after ≥5 years.
Individual species abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in freshwater trenches in Canada found that adding peat-rich soil to pots of mine tailings before planting water sedge Carex aquatilis typically increased its above-ground biomass two growing seasons later.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE
 
OTHER

Survival (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in freshwater trenches in Canada found that adding peat-rich soil to pots of mine tailings either increased or had no significant effect on survival of planted water sedge Carex aquatilis over two growing seasons.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
