3397: Sow grass seeds
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Key Messages:

Thirteen studies examined the effects of sowing grass seeds on grassland vegetation. Six studies were in North America, five studies were in Europe and one study was in each of Canada and South Africa.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY (6 STUDIES)

Community composition (2 studies): One of two paired studies (one of which was replicated, randomized and controlled) in Hungary and the UK found that, over time, plant communities in areas where grass seeds were sown and in areas where no seeds were sown became more similar to those of intact grasslands. The other study found that plant communities in sown areas were different from those of ancient grasslands or sites where natural regeneration was allowed.
Overall richness/diversity (4 studies): Three of four studies (three of which were replicated and controlled, and one of which was a site comparison) in the UK, Hungary, Iceland and the USA found that sowing grass seeds did not change or reduced overall plant species richness. The other study found that species richness was lower than that found in nearby intact prairies.
Native/non-target species richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the USA found that sowing grass seeds did not alter the species richness of native plants.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE (10 STUDIES)

Overall abundance (3 studies): Two of three studies (including two replicated, controlled studies and one site comparison) in the USA, Iceland and Norway found that sowing grass seeds increased vegetation cover. The other study found that in two of three years there was no difference in vegetation cover between areas where grass seeds were sown and those where no seeds were sown.
Characteristic plant abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in Hungary found that sowing grass seeds reduced the abundance of grassland species.
Sown/planted species abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in South Africa found that sowing grass seeds increased the abundance of sown species.
Grass abundance (4 studies): Three of four replicated studies (two of which were randomized, controlled studies and the other a site comparison) in the USA and Canada found that sowing grass seeds either reduced native grass cover or did not alter native grass density. The other study found that after two years grass cover was higher in areas where grass seeds were sown than in areas were no seeds were sown, but after seven years there was no longer a difference between areas.
Forb abundance (2 studies): One of two replicated studies (one randomized, controlled study and one site comparison) in the USA and Canada found that sowing grass seeds reduced the abundance of native forb species. The other study found no change in the density of native forb species.
Tree/shrub abundance (2 studies): Two replicated studies (one randomized, controlled study and one site comparison) in the USA and Canada found that sowing grass seeds reduced the abundance of shrub species.
Native/non-target species abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the USA found that sowing grass seeds did not alter the cover of native plant species.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Grassland Conservation
Description: Grassland Synopsis
