1139: Water primrose: Chemical control using herbicides
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Application of chemical herbicides may offer a tool for management of water primrose Ludwigia spp. provided regulatory approvals are in place.  For example, glyphosate has been reported to have successfully eradicated water primrose Ludwigia spp. at three UK sites (Renals 2010).
Adjuvants are agents that can modify the effect of chemical herbicides, thereby increasing their effectiveness.  It has been reported that there is a synergistic benefit of applying an adjuvant such as TopFilm alongside glyphosate.  It is reported that the combined use of herbicide and adjuvant has eradicated various small stands of large-flower primrose-willow (Newman 2008). A review also references the potential for synergistic application of glyphosate and TopFilm, reporting the most effective application rates to be 2.28 kg of glyphosate and one litre/ hectare of TopFilm, and reporting June and July to be the best time for application (Plant Protection Service at al. 2011).
Renals, T. (2010) Ludwigia Eradication: A Rough Model for the Future. Proceedings of the 42nd Robson Meeting, CEH, Wallingford, UK. 1pp.
Newman J R (2008).  Aquatic Weed Control.  Proceedings of the 40th Robson Meeting. CEH, Wallingford, UK. 1pp.
Plant Protection Service, Plant Research International Wageningen UR, Aquatic Ecology and Water Quality Management Group & Centre for Ecology and Hydrology Wallingford (2011) EUPHRESCO DeCLAIM Final report A State of the art June 2011. Ludwigia grandiflora (Michx.) Greuter & Burdet. 63pp.

Key Messages:

A controlled, replicated laboratory study in the USA found that the herbicide triclopyr TEA applied at concentrations of 0.25% killed 100% of young cultivated water primrose within two months. 
A before-and-after field study in the UK found that the herbicide glyphosate controlled water primrose, causing 97% mortality when mixed with a non-oil based sticking agent and 100% mortality when combined with TopFilm.
A controlled, replicated, randomized study in Venezuela3, found that use of the herbicide halosulfuron-methyl (Sempra) resulted in a significant reduction in water primrose coverage without apparent toxicity to rice plants.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species
Description: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species Synopsis
