1074: Ponto-Caspian gobies: Use of barriers to prevent migration
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
A number of different systems can be used to prevent dispersal of fish to new habitats, or to prevent their migration.  For example, a replicated study from the USA found that leaf litter could act as a barrier, preventing dispersal of the eastern mosquitofish Gambusia holbrooki (Alemadi & Jenkins 2008).  Another controlled study from the USA found that sound bubble barriers prevented Asian carp (Cyprinidae) from moving upstream (Ruebush et al. 2012).  Other systems include altered flow rates.  However, one study concluded that water flow rates faster than 125 cm/second, along with a route free from rest and refuge areas, would be necessary to prevent round goby Neogobius melanostomus  migrating upstream (Tierny et al. 2011).  This was because round gobies were found to be able to hold their position in strong water currents for extended periods using their pectoral fins as brakes, and could recover rapidly from exhaustive exercise, achieving powerful speed bursts (Tierny et al. 2011).  Other systems that can be used to prevent fish migration include electrical barriers.
Alemadi S.D. & Jenkins D.G. (2008) Behavioral constraints for the spread of the eastern mosquitofish, Gambusia holbrooki (Poeciliidae). Biological Invasions, 10, 59-66.
Ruebush B.C., Sass G.G., Chick J.H. & Stafford J.D. (2012) In-situ tests of sound-bubble-strobe light barrier technologies to prevent range expansions of Asian carp. Aquatic Invasions, 7, 37-48.
Tierny K.B., Kasurak A.V., Zielinski B.S. & Higgs D.M. (2011) Swimming performance and invasion potential of the round goby. Environmental Biology of Fishes, 92, 491-502.

Key Messages:

A controlled, replicated field study in the USA, found that an electrical barrier prevented movement of round gobies across it, and that increasing electrical pulse duration and voltage increased effectiveness of the barrier.

 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species
Description: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species Synopsis
