3470: Use environmentally-sensitive material on subtidal artificial structures
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Definition: ‘Environmentally-sensitive materials’ are materials that seek to maximize environmental benefits and/or minimize environmental risks of marine engineering.
Material type influences the settlement and survival of marine organisms in subtidal rocky habitats. Settlement preferences and competition lead to some species being more abundant than others on certain materials (Andersson et al. 2009; Guidetti et al. 2004), but patterns vary by environmental conditions. Physical (lithology, hardness, porosity, colour, texture) and chemical (pH, mineralogy, toxicity) properties of rock and manufactured materials can affect how they weather over time and what communities develop on them (Coombes et al. 2011).
Marine artificial structures are often made from hard quarried rock, concrete, wood, steel or plastic, according to engineering requirements, cost and/or availability. Synthetic materials can be associated with the presence of non-native species (Dafforn 2017), whereas structures made from natural rock may support more natural rocky reef communities. There may be opportunities to use more environmentally-sensitive materials in structures or in eco-engineering habitat designs added to structures to enhance their biodiversity. Concrete is commonly-used in eco-engineering designs since it is durable and easy to mould into complex shapes. Yet adding manufactured concrete habitats to structures to enhance biodiversity may not deliver a net environmental gain because of the large CO2 footprint of concrete production (Heery et al. 2020). Concrete mixes can be manipulated to alter their physical and chemical properties (McManus et al. 2018; Natanzi et al. 2021) and environmental footprint (Dennis et al. 2018). Lower-footprint materials may be preferable, regardless of their effect on colonizing biodiversity; a neutral/no effect on biodiversity may still offer a higher net environmental gain (or lower net loss).
It is often not possible to separate the effects of the various physical and chemical properties of materials on biodiversity. Studies that directly examine the effects of creating different surface textures are included under the action “Create textured surfaces (≤1 mm) on subtidal artificial structures”; any other material comparisons are considered here. There are bodies of literature investigating the effects of material on settlement behaviour and ecological interactions in the laboratory and field (e.g. Davis et al. 2017; Glasby 2000), for artificial reefs and coral gardening (reviewed by Baine 2001; Spieler et al. 2001), and for anti-fouling applications (e.g. Hanson & Bell 1976). Unless the relevance is explicitly highlighted by the authors, these studies are not included in this synopsis, which focusses on in situ conservation actions to promote colonization of biodiversity on marine artificial structures that are engineered to fulfil a primary function other than providing artificial habitats.
See also: Create textured surfaces (≤1 mm) on subtidal artificial structures.
Andersson M.H., Berggren M., Wilhelmsson D. & Öhman M.C. (2009) Epibenthic colonization of concrete and steel pilings in a cold-temperate embayment: a field experiment. Helgoland Marine Research, 63, 249–260.
Baine M. (2001) Artificial reefs: a review of their design, application, management and performance. Ocean & Coastal Management, 44, 241–259.
Coombes M.A., Naylor L.A., Thompson R.C., Roast S.D., Gómez-Pujol L. & Fairhurst R.J. (2011) Colonization and weathering of engineering materials by marine microorganisms: an SEM study. Earth Surface Processes and Lanforms, 36, 585–593.
Dafforn K.A. (2017) Eco-engineering and management strategies for marine infrastructures to reduce establishment and dispersal of non-indigenous species. Management of Biological Invasions, 8, 153–161.
Davis K.L., Coleman M.A., Connell S.D., Russell B.D., Gillanders B.M. & Kelaher B.P. (2017) Ecological performance of construction materials subject to ocean climate change. Marine Environmental Research, 131, 177–182.
Dennis H.D., Evans A.J., Banner A.J. & Moore P.J. (2018) Reefcrete: reducing the environmental footprint of concretes for eco-engineering marine structures. Ecological Engineering, 120, 668–678.
Glasby T.M. (2000) Surface composition and orientation interact to affect subtidal epibiota. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology, 248, 177–190.
Guidetti P., Bianchi C.N., Chiantore M., Schiaparelli S., Morri C. & Cattaneo-Vietti R. (2004) Living on the rocks: substrate mineralogy and the structure of subtidal rocky substrate communities in the Mediterranean Sea. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 274, 57–68.
Hanson C.H. & Bell J. (1976) Subtidal and intertidal marine fouling on artificial substrata in northern Puget Sound, Washington. Fishery Bulletin (United States), 74, 2.
Heery E.C., Lian K.Y., Loke L.H.L., Tan H.T.W. & Todd P.A. (2020) Evaluating seaweed farming as an eco-engineering strategy for 'blue' shoreline infrastructure. Ecological Engineering, 152, 105857.
McManus R.S., Archibald N., Comber S., Knights A.M., Thompson R.C. & Firth L.B. (2018) Partial replacement of cement for waste aggregates in concrete coastal and marine infrastructure: a foundation for ecological enhancement? Ecological Engineering, 120, 655–667.
Natanzi A.S., Thompson B.J., Brooks P.R., Crowe T.P. & McNally C. (2021) Influence of concrete properties on the initial biological colonisation of marine artificial structures. Ecological Engineering, 159, 106104.
Spieler R.E., Gilliam D.S. & Sherman R.L. (2001) Artificial substrate and coral reef restoration: what do we need to know to know what we need. Bulletin of Marine Science, 69, 1013–1030.

Key Messages:

Fourteen studies examined the effects of using environmentally-sensitive material on subtidal artificial structures on the biodiversity of those structures. Seven studies were on open coastlines in the United Arab Emirates, Italy, Israel, southeast Spain, and in France, the UK, Portugal and Spain. Three were in marinas in northern Israel and the UK, two were in estuaries in southeast Australia and eastern USA, one was in a lagoon in Mayotte, and one was in a port in Germany.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (11 STUDIES)

Overall community composition (11 studies): Six of 11 replicated, controlled studies (including eight randomized, three paired sites and one before-and-after study) in Australia, the United Arab Emirates, Italy, Israel, the USA, the UK, Spain and Germany found that using shell-concrete or quarried rock in place of standard-concrete on subtidal artificial structures, or using ECOncreteTM in place of standard-concrete or fibreglass, along with creating texture, grooves, holes, pits and/or small ledges, altered the combined macroalgae and invertebrate community composition on structure surfaces. Three studies found that using quarried rock or blast-furnace-cement-concrete in place of standard-concrete did not alter the community composition, while one found mixed effects depending on the type of rock tested and the site. One found that using different cement mixes in concrete (including some with recycled cements) altered the community composition of native species, but not non-natives. Three of the studies also reported that ECOncreteTM surfaces with added habitats supported mobile invertebrate, non-mobile invertebrate and/or fish species that were absent from standard-concrete or fibreglass structure surfaces.
Overall richness/diversity (7 studies): Three of seven replicated, controlled studies (including five randomized, two paired sites and one before-and-after study) in Italy, Israel, the USA, the UK and Spain found that using quarried rock, shell-concrete or recycled-cement-concrete in place of standard-concrete on subtidal artificial structures had mixed effects on the combined macroalgae and invertebrate species richness on structure surfaces, depending on the site, surface orientation or type of cement tested. One of the studies, along with one other, found that using shell-concrete or quarried rock did not increase the species diversity and/or richness, while one found that using recycled cement did not increase the non-native species richness. Three studies found that using ECOncreteTM, along with creating texture, grooves, holes, pits and/or small ledges, did increase the species diversity and/or richness on and around structures.
Algal richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in the UK found that using recycled-cement-concrete in place of standard-concrete on subtidal artificial structures did not increase the diatom species richness on structure surfaces.

POPULATION RESPONSE (11 STUDIES)

Overall abundance (7 studies): Three of seven replicated studies (including six controlled, four randomized and one paired sites study) in the United Arab Emirates, Italy, Israel, the USA, the UK, Spain, and in France, the UK, Portugal and Spain found that using quarried rock or shell-concrete in place of standard-concrete on subtidal artificial structures did not increase the combined macroalgae and invertebrate abundance on structure surfaces. Two studies found mixed effects, depending on the type of quarried rock or concrete tested and/or the location. One found that using ECOncreteTM in place of fibreglass, along with creating textured surfaces, increased the live cover and biomass, while one found that different ECOncreteTM and standard-concrete mixes supported different cover and inorganic biomass but similar organic biomass.
Algal abundance (6 studies): Four of six replicated, controlled studies (including four randomized and one paired sites study) in Australia, the United Arab Emirates, Italy, Israel and the UK found that using quarried rock or recycled-cement-concrete in place of standard-concrete on subtidal artificial structures did not increase the abundance of brown, turf or coralline macroalgae, canopy macroalgae recruits or diatoms on structure surfaces. Two studies found that using quarried rock or using ECOncreteTM, along with creating grooves, holes and pits, had mixed effects on macroalgal abundance, depending on the species group and/or site. One of the studies found that using quarried rock increased red and green macroalgal abundance.
Invertebrate abundance (6 studies): Three of six replicated, controlled studies (including four randomized and one paired sites study) in Austalia, the United Arab Emirates, Italy, Israel and the UK found that using quarried rock in place of concrete on subtidal artificial structures, or using ECOncreteTM, along with creating grooves, holes and pits, had mixed effects on the abundance of non-mobile invertebrates, mobile invertebrates or coral recruits on structure surfaces, depending on the type of rock tested, the species group and/or the site. One of the studies, along with one other, found that using quarried rock did not increase the abundance of sponges, bryozoans, ascidians, mussels, barnacles, or Serpulid tubeworms, but in one it decreased Spirorbid tubeworm abundance. One study found that using shell-concrete increased bivalve abundance. One found that different ECOncreteTM and standard-concrete mixes supported different coral abundance.
Fish abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Israel found that using ECOncreteTM in place of standard-concrete on subtidal artificial structures, along with creating grooves, holes and pits, had mixed effects on fish abundances, depending on the species group.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Use (1 study): One study in Mayotte reported that basalt rock surfaces created on a concrete subtidal artificial structure, along with small and large swimthroughs, were used by juvenile spiny lobsters and groupers, sea firs, and adult fishes from five families.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Biodiversity of Marine Artificial Structures
Description: Enhancing biodiversity of marine artificial structures synopsis
