2229: Designate a Marine Protected Area and prohibit all towed (mobile) fishing gear
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Fishing can impact subtidal benthic invertebrates through species removal or habitat damage from fishing gear entering in contact with the seabed (Collie et al. 2000). Mobile fishing gear such as bottom trawls, dredges, and other towed gears, are known to be particularly damaging as they are dragged onto the seabed. Specific areas can be designated as protected, and specific management measures taken to control for towed gears (Blyth et al. 2002; Sheehan et al. 2013). Inside protected areas where mobile fishing gear is prohibited, the threat from these practices to subtidal benthic invertebrates is removed, and previously impacted populations are, in theory, able to recover over time (Blyth et al. 2004). However, species and populations are still subjected to the effects of other fishing activities allowed (for instance commercial potting or recreational fishing).
When this intervention occurred outside of a protected area, evidence has been summarised under “Threat: Biological resource use - Cease or prohibit all towed (mobile) fishing gear”. Evidence for related interventions is summarised under “Habitat protection – Designate a Marine Protected Area and prohibit bottom trawling” and “Designate a Marine Protected Area and prohibit dredging”.
 
Blyth R.E., Kaiser M.J., Edwards-Jones G. & Hart P.J.B. (2004) Implications of a zoned fishery management system for marine benthic communities. Journal of Applied Ecology, 41, 951–961.
Blyth R.E., Kaiser M.J., Edwards-Jones G. & Hart P.J.B. (2002) Voluntary management in an inshore fishery has conservation benefits. Environmental Conservation, 29, 493–508.
Collie J.S., Hall S.J., Kaiser M.J. & Poiner I.R. (2000) A quantitative analysis of fishing impacts on shelf‐sea benthos. Journal of Animal Ecology, 69, 785–798.
Sheehan E.V., Cousens S.L., Nancollas S.J., Stauss C., Royle J. & Attrill M.J. (2013) Drawing lines at the sand: Evidence for functional vs. visual reef boundaries in temperate Marine Protected Areas. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 76, 194–202.

Key Messages:

Two studies examined the effects of prohibiting all towed gear in marine protected areas on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations. One study was in the Bristol Channel and the Irish Sea (UK), the other in the English Channel (UK).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Overall community composition (1 study): One before-and-after, site comparison study in the English Channel found that, over the three years after closing a marine protected area to all towed gears, the community composition of reef-indicative invertebrate species became different to that of unprotected fished sites.
Overall diversity/species richness (1 study): One before-and-after, site comparison study in the English Channel found that, over the three years after closing a marine protected area to all towed gears, the number of reef-indicative invertebrate species remained similar to unprotected fished sites.

POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Overall abundance (1 study): One before-and-after, site comparison study in the English Channel found that, over the three years after closing a marine protected area to all towed gears, the abundance of reef-indicative invertebrate species became greater than at unprotected fished sites.
Crustacean abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the Bristol Channel and the Irish Sea found that a marine protected area closed to all towed gear (only allowing potting) for 33 to 36 years had mixed effects on the abundances of lobsters and crabs depending on species.
Crustacean condition (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the Bristol Channel and the Irish Sea found that a marine protected area closed to all towed gear (only allowing potting) for 33 to 36 years had mixed effects on the sizes of lobsters and crabs depending on species.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
