2995: Design transportation or service corridors to maintain water flow
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Transportation or service corridors can block water flows into or out of wetlands (Shuldiner & Cope 1979). However, careful design and construction could minimize this effect, maintaining the amount, timing and quality of water flows. Specific features to facilitate water movement include permeable fill and logs under the infrastructure running parallel with the direction of flow (Partington et al. 2016).
Related actions: actions to restore water flows across transportation or service corridors, i.e. Raise water level to restore degraded habitats (freshwater marshes – brackish/salt marshes – freshwater swamps – brackish/saline swamps),     Facilitate tidal exchange to restore degraded marshes or swamps (freshwater marshes – brackish/salt marshes – freshwater swamps – brackish/saline swamps),     Raise water level to restore/create habitats from other land uses (freshwater marshes – brackish/salt marshes – freshwater swamps – brackish/saline swamps)     and     Facilitate tidal exchange to restore/create marshes or swamps from other land uses (freshwater marshes – brackish/salt marshes – freshwater swamps – brackish/saline swamps).
Partington M., Gillies C., Gingras B., Smith C. & Morissette J. (2016) Resource Roads and Wetlands: A Guide for Planning, Construction and Maintenance. FPInnovations Special Publication SP-530E.
Shuldiner P.W. & Cope D.F. (1979) Ecological effects of highway fills on wetlands: examples from the field. Transportation Research Record, 736, 29–37.

Key Messages:
We found no studies that evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of designing infrastructure to maintain water flow into/out of marshes or swamps.
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
