3898: Leave headlands in fields unsprayed (conservation headlands)  
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
In conventional farming, a wide range of chemicals are commonly applied for pest control or fertilization, but these can have lethal or sub-lethal effects on farmland wildlife, including butterflies and moths (Russell & Schultz 2010, Schultz et al. 2016). Conservation headland management involves restricted fertilizer, herbicide and insecticide spraying in a margin (usually 6 m wide) of crop at the edge of the field, which may allow butterfly and moth populations to persist within the farm.
For studies on restricting chemical applications across the farm, see “Reduce fertilizer, pesticide or herbicide use generally”. For studies on removing chemical applications entirely, see “Convert to organic farming”.
Russell C. & Schultz C.B. (2010) Effects of grass-specific herbicides on butterflies: an experimental investigation to advance conservation efforts. Journal of Insect Conservation, 14, 53–63.
Schultz C.B., Zemaitis J.L., Thomas C.C., Bowers M.D. & Crone E.E. (2016) Non-target effects of grass-specific herbicides differ among species, chemicals and host plants in Euphydryas butterflies. Journal of Insect Conservation, 20, 867–877.

Key Messages:

Six studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of leaving headlands in fields unsprayed. Four studies were in the UK, and two were in the Netherlands.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Richness/diversity (2 studies): Two replicated, paired, controlled studies in the UK and the Netherlands found that unsprayed headlands in arable fields had a greater species richness of butterflies than headlands sprayed with herbicide and insecticide.

POPULATION RESPONSE (5 STUDIES)

Abundance (5 studies): Four of five replicated, controlled studies (including one randomized study) in the UK and the Netherlands found that unsprayed headlands in arable and pasture fields had a greater abundance of butterflies and caterpillars than headlands sprayed with herbicide and insecticide. The other study found that unsprayed headlands in arable fields had a similar abundance of caterpillars to headlands sprayed with herbicide.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Use (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in the UK found that large white, small white and green-veined white butterflies spent more time in unsprayed arable headlands than adjacent hedgerows, but more time in the hedgerows when adjacent headlands were sprayed with herbicide. The same study found that gatekeepers spent more time in hedgerows than headlands regardless of whether the headlands were unsprayed or sprayed.
Behaviour change (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in the UK found that large white, small white and green-veined white butterflies spent more time feeding and interacting, or had slower flight speeds, in unsprayed arable headlands than in headlands sprayed with herbicide. However, the same study found that male gatekeepers spend less time feeding and interacting, and had faster flight speeds, in unsprayed headlands than in sprayed headlands.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
