2780: Prohibit or restrict hunting of marine and freshwater mammal species
Effectiveness rating: Beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Marine and freshwater mammals may be hunted for their meat, oil, furs, or skins. Historically, hunting of marine mammals has occurred worldwide and has resulted in population declines of many species, and in some cases extinctions (Reeves 2009). This intervention involves prohibiting or restricting hunting specifically where hunting is a major threat to a population of a species. Enforcement may also be required as illegal hunting may still occur (e.g. Consentino & Fisher 2016).
For general legal protection from a wider range of threats, see Legally protect marine and freshwater mammal species and Legally protect habitat for marine and freshwater mammals.
Cosentino A.M. & Fisher S. (2016) The utilization of aquatic bushmeat from small cetaceans and manatees in South America and West Africa. Frontiers in Marine Science, 3.
Reeves R.R. (2009) Hunting of marine mammals. Pages 585–588 in: Perrin W.F., Würsig B. & Thewissen J.G.M. (eds.) Encyclopedia of marine mammals (Second Edition). Academic Press, London.

Key Messages:

Five studies evaluated the effects of prohibiting hunting of marine mammal species. One study was in each of the Kattegat and Skagerrak seas (Denmark and Sweden), the North Atlantic Ocean, North Pacific Ocean and the Southern Hemisphere, the South Pacific Ocean (Australia), the North Atlantic Ocean (Greenland) and the Southern Ocean (Australia).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (5 STUDIES)

Abundance (5 studies): Four of five studies (including three before-and-after studies) in the Kattegat and Skagerrak Seas, the South Pacific Ocean, the North Atlantic Ocean and the Southern Ocean found that after hunting was prohibited, the abundance of harbour seals and humpback whales increased over 7–30 years. The other study found that numbers of mature male sperm whales did not differ significantly before or 31 years after hunting was prohibited. One review in the North Atlantic Ocean, North Pacific Ocean and the Southern Hemisphere found significant increase rates for 10 of 12 baleen whale populations during 7–21 years after legislation to prohibit hunting was introduced.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
