954: Create or restore bat foraging habitat in urban areas
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Providing foraging habitat for bats in urban areas may reduce the impact of residential and commercial development. Existing foraging sites may be protected, or be replaced with suitable alternatives such as parks, woodland and wetlands. Bat activity was found to be higher in large parks in Mexico City than in natural forest or other urban habitats, although the number of species was higher in natural forest (Avila-Flores & Fenton 2005). Habitats should also be appropriately managed for bats, for example a study in Australia found more bat species in urban green spaces with a higher density of large trees and native plants (Threlfall et al. 2016). See also ‘Protect greenfield sites or undeveloped land in urban areas’.
Avila-Flores R. & Fenton M.B. (2005) Use of spatial features by foraging insectivorous bats in a large urban landscape. Journal of Mammalogy, 86, 1193–1204.
Threlfall C.G., Williams N.S.G., Hahs A.K. & Livesley S.J. (2016) Approaches to urban vegetation management and the impacts on urban bird and bat assemblages. Landscape and Urban Planning, 153, 28–39.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects of creating or restoring bat foraging habitat in urban areas on bat populations. One study in each of the UK and USA evaluated green roofs and one study in the USA evaluated restored forest fragments.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, controlled, site comparison study in the USA found no difference in species richness over green roofs and conventional unvegetated roofs.

POPULATION RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Abundance (3 studies): One site comparison study in the USA found higher bat activity (relative abundance) in two of seven restored forest fragments in urban areas than in two unrestored forest fragments. One replicated, controlled, site comparison study in the UK found greater bat activity over ‘biodiverse’ green roofs than conventional unvegetated roofs, but not over ‘sedum’ green roofs. One replicated, controlled, site comparison study in the USA found greater bat activity for three of five bat species over green roofs than over conventional unvegetated roofs.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Bat Conservation
Description: Update 2020
