1552: Control 'reservoir' species to reduce parasite burdens/pathogen sources
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
The transmission of infectious agents from reservoir animal populations (e.g. domesticated species) to sympatric (occurring within the same geographical area) wildlife presents a particular threat to endangered species, because the presence of infected reservoir hosts can lower the pathogen's threshold density and lead to local wildlife population-level extinctions. For example, African wild dogs Lycaon pictus became extinct in the Serengeti in 1991, concurrent with epizootic canine distemper in sympatric domestic dogs (e.g. Daszak et al. 2000). This intervention aims to control such reservoir species to reduce parasite burdens/pathogen sources for wild primate populations.
            Controlling the actions of humans as ‘reservoir’ species to reduce pathogen sources is discussed under: ‘Ensure that researchers are up-to-date with vaccinations and healthy’, ‘Regularly disinfect researcher's clothes, boots etc.’, ‘Wear gloves when handling primate food, tool items, etc.’, ‘Implement quarantine for people arriving at, and leaving the site’, ‘Wear face-masks to avoid transmission of viral and bacterial diseases to primates’, ‘Keep safety distance to habituated animals’, and ‘Limit time that researchers are allowed to spend with habituated animals’.
 
Daszak P., Cunningham A.A. & Hyatt A.D. (2000) Unhealthy travelers present challenges to sustainable primate ecotourism. Science, 287, 443–449.

Key Messages:

We found no evidence for the effects of controlling ‘reservoir’ species to reduce parasite burdens/pathogen sources on primate populations.

'No evidence' for an action means we have not yet found any studies that directly and quantitatively tested this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Primate Conservation
Description: Primate Synopsis
