1689: Parrot’s feather: Use of herbicides - triclopyr
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Chemical herbicides have been used for the localized control of parrot’s feather (e.g. Morreira et al. 1999). Herbicides licensed for use around the world use a wide diversity of different active ingredients (e.g. 2,4-D, imazapyr, carfentrazone-ethyl, diquat). However, herbicide control of aquatic vegetation is prohibited in numerous countries (e.g. no herbicides are approved for submerged species in Europe) (De Winton et al. 2013; Hussner et al. 2017). Therefore it is important to consider local regulations before using herbicide control. Legislative restrictions may be lifted for herbicides under particular conditions (Hussner et al. 2017). Impacts on non-target species should be considered prior to herbicide use.
Emerged and submerged vegetation may require different herbicides, and adjuvants may increase the efficacy of the treatment. More than one application of the herbicide is often required. The use of fungal-based herbicides to control parrot’s feather is discussed under the intervention ‘Biological control using fungal-based herbicides’.
 
De Winton M., Jones H., Edwards T., Özkundakci D., Wells R., McBride C., Rowe D., Hamilton D., Clayton J., Champion P. & Hofstra D. (2013) Review of Best Management Practices for Aquatic Vegetation Control in Stormwater Ponds, Wetlands, and Lakes. Auckland Council technical report, TR2013/026.
Hussner A., Stiers I., Verhofstad M.J.J.M., Bakker E.S., Grutters B.M.C., Haury J., van Valkenburg J.L.C.H., Brundu G., Newman J., Clayton J.S. & Anderson L.W.J. (2017) Management and control methods of invasive alien freshwater aquatic plants: A review. Aquatic Botany, 136, 112-137.
Moreira I., Ferreira T., Monteiro A., Catarino L. & Vasconcelos T. (1999) Aquatic weeds and their management in Portugal: insights and the international context. Hydrobiologia 415, 229–234.

Key Messages:

Two replicated, controlled laboratory studies in New Zealand and the USA reported reduced growth of parrot’s feather following treatment with triclopyr.
One replicated, before-and-after and one replicated, controlled field study in New Zealand found that cover was reduced after treatment with triclopyr. However, one of the studies noted that cover later increased to levels close to pre-treatment.
One replicated, controlled laboratory study in New Zealand found that the application of triclopyr led to a greater reduction in cover than the application of glyphosate.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species
Description: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species Synopsis
