1779: Divert/replace polluted water source(s)
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This section considers interventions that prevent polluted water from entering peatlands. These usually involve construction of new pipes, channels or waterways to divert polluted water away from a focal peatland. Clearly, this could create a pollution problem for another habitat – unless the polluted water is diverted into a waste water treatment system, such as a constructed wetland.
Caution: Peatland vegetation is very sensitive to water quantity and quality (Rydin & Jeglum 2013). If a polluted water source is removed from a fen, it may need to be replaced with an alternative clean water source to avoid the peatland drying out (e.g. Kooijman et al. 2016). The chemistry of this water should be carefully monitored or controlled to avoid changing the chemistry of the peatland. Ground water should generally not be added to bogs: they should receive water only as rain.
Key peatland types for which this action may be appropriate: bogs, fens/fen meadows, tropical peat swamps.
Related actions: drain/replace acidic water, which focuses on the removal/replacement of a specific type of polluted water; legally protect peatlands, including policies or laws to prevent pollution.
Kooijman A.M., Cusell C., Mettrop I.S. & Lamers L.P.M. (2016) Recovery of target bryophytes in floating rich fens after 25 yr of inundation by base-rich surface water with lower nutrient contents. Applied Vegetation Science, 19, 53–65.
Rydin H. & Jeglum J.K. (2013) The Biology of Peatlands, Second Edition. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects, on peatland vegetation, of diverting or replacing polluted water source(s). Two studies were in bogs and one was in a fen.
Characteristic plants (1 study): One study in a fen in the Netherlands found that after a nutrient-enriched water source was replaced (along with other interventions to reduce pollution), cover of mosses characteristic of low nutrient levels increased.
Vegetation cover (2 studies): Two studies (one before-and-after) in bogs in the UK and Japan reported that after polluting water sources were diverted (sometimes along with other interventions), Sphagnum moss cover increased. Both studies reported mixed effects on herb cover, depending on species.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
