2153: Limit, cease or prohibit recreational diving
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Recreational activities such as diving can impact subtidal benthic invertebrates through physical damage to species and habitats, and disturbance to sediment and organisms (Harriott et al. 1997; Luna et al. 2009). Recreational diving could be limited, by restricting access in space and time (duration and occurrence) or restricting the type of gears divers are allowed to carry. It could be ceased by setting a permanent or temporary closure, or prohibited through bylaws. This may help reduce the intensity of the threats associated with diving and potentially allow subtidal benthic invertebrate communities to persist or recover over time.
When restrictions of recreational activities occur in the context of a marine protected area, evidence is summarised under “Habitat protection”, including “Habitat protection - Designate a Marine Protected Area and set a no-anchoring zone”, “Designate a Marine Protected Area and prohibit the harvest of scallops”, “Designate a Marine Protected Area and prohibit the harvest of conch” and “Designate a Marine Protected Area and prohibit the harvest of sea urchins”. Other evidence for interventions related to recreational boating is summarised under “Threat: Transportation and service corridors – Shipping lanes”.
 
Harriott V.J., Davis D. & Banks S.A. (1997) Recreational diving and its impact in marine protected areas in eastern Australia. Ambio, 173–179.
Luna B., Pérez C.V. & Sánchez-Lizaso J.L. (2009) Benthic impacts of recreational divers in a Mediterranean Marine Protected Area. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 66, 517–523.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of limiting, ceasing or prohibiting recreational diving on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
