3213: Reprofile/relandscape: freshwater marshes
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This action involves large-scale reprofiling or landscaping, aiming to restore or create marshes. This includes excavating large basins (&gt;8 ha or &gt;280 m diameter), moving soil/sediment from the site into levees/berms/impoundments, removing unnatural hills or levees, filling in deep depressions and altering the elevation/slope of coastal areas. In other words, this intervention aims to restore wetland hydrology (how wet the soil is and when it is wet/flooded) by adjusting the ground surface relative to the water table or sea. Soil from existing marshes or swamps might be imported as part of relandscaping efforts, but we consider this as a separate action.
Caution: Heavy machinery is usually needed for this action. Heavy vehicles can churn and compress wetland soils (Campbell et al. 2002).
Related actions: Raise water level to restore degraded marshes; Raise water level to restore/create marshes from other land uses; Facilitate tidal exchange to restore degraded marshes; Facilitate tidal exchange to restore/create marshes from other land uses; Excavate pools; Create mounds or hollows; Remove surface soil/sediment; Deposit soil/sediment to form physical habitat structure; Reprofile/relandscape before planting.
Campbell D.A., Cole C.A. & Brooks R.P. (2002) A comparison of created and natural wetlands in Pennsylvania, USA. Wetlands Ecology and Management, 10, 41–49.

Key Messages:

Thirteen studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of reprofiling/relandscaping to restore or create freshwater marshes. Ten studies were in the USA. There was one study in each of France, the UK and Italy. Two pairs of studies used the same or similar sites in Connecticut and Nebraska.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall extent (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA reported that emergent vegetation stands covered a smaller area within excavated than natural marshes, 4–5 years after intervention.
Community composition (3 studies): Two site comparison studies (one before-and-after, one replicated) in France and the USA reported that reprofiling affected the overall plant community composition. In the USA, the community differed from, but was not intermediate between, natural marshes and degraded marshes. One study in the USA simply quantified the wetness of the overall plant community in an excavated wetland, 1–2 growing seasons after intervention.
Overall richness/diversity (9 studies): Three replicated, site comparison studies in the USA found that plant species richness (overall or wetland species) was similar in reprofiled and natural marshes, 1–13 years after intervention. One before-and-after, site comparison study in the UK reported that overall plant species richness was not higher in excavated (and planted) reedbeds, than in a nearby natural reedbed, after seven years. One before-and-after study in France reported that there were more plant species present in a marsh in the two summers after reprofiling than in the summer before. Four studies in the USA and Italy simply reported the number of plant species on wetlands that had been reprofiled or excavated (sometimes along with other interventions), after three months to 23 years.
Characteristic plant richness/diversity (1 study): One study in the USA simply reported the number of wetland-characteristic plant species in excavated wetlands, for up to 18 years after intervention.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (8 studies): Two replicated, site comparison studies in the USA reported that overall vegetation cover was similar in reprofiled and natural marshes, 2–13 years after intervention. One of the studies also found that vegetation cover was similar in reprofiled and degraded marshes. Another replicated, site comparison study in the USA reported that vegetation cover within emergent vegetation stands was lower in excavated than natural marshes, 4–5 years after intervention. Five studies in the USA simply quantified overall vegetation abundance on wetlands that had been reprofiled or excavated (sometimes along with other interventions), after three months to 18 years. One of these studies reported an absence of vegetation after two years.
Characteristic plant abundance (1 study): One study in the USA simply quantified the abundance of wetland-characteristic plants in an excavated wetland, after 1–2 growing seasons.
Bryophyte abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA reported that excavated marshes contained a lower abundance (frequency and biomass) of bryophytes than natural marshes, 2–15 years after intervention.
Trees/shrub abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA reported that excavated marshes had lower woody plant cover than natural marshes, after 12–13 years.
Individual species abundance (10 studies): Ten studies quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. Two of these studies were replicated site comparisons in the USA, and reported mixed responses. For example, broadleaf cattail Typha latifolia typically had lower cover in excavated than natural marshes in one study, but greater cover in excavated than natural marshes in the other study.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
