2901: Use methods to dampen underwater noise emissions (e.g. bubble curtains, screens)
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Activities that produce large amounts of underwater noise, such as seismic airgun surveys, pile driving, dredging, explosives and sonar, may disturb or cause auditory injury to marine and freshwater mammals (Gordon et al. 2003, Bailey et al. 2010). Various methods may be used to dampen underwater noise emissions. This may involve surrounding the sound source with devices to absorb energy, such as screens or physical barriers, bubble curtains (a ‘curtain’ of air bubbles), hydro-sound dampeners (nets with gas-filled balloons and foam attached), cofferdams (insulated sleeves) or a combination of these measures (Verfuss 2014).
See also Use methods to reduce sediment disturbance during dredging (e.g. curtains, screens).
Bailey H., Senior B., Simmons D., Rusin J., Picken G. & Thompson P.M. (2010) Assessing underwater noise levels during pile-driving at an offshore windfarm and its potential effects on marine mammals. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 60, 888–897.
Gordon J., Gillespie D., Potter J., Frantzis A., Simmonds M.P., Swift R. & Thompson D. (2003) A review of the effects of seismic surveys on marine mammals. Marine Technology Society Journal, 37, 16–34.
Verfuss T. (2014) Noise mitigation systems and low-noise installation technologies. Pages 181–191 in: Federal Maritime and Hydrographic Agency, Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation & Nuclear Safety (eds.) Ecological Research at the Offshore Windfarm alpha ventus: Challenges, Results and Perspectives. Springer, Wiesbaden.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects on marine mammals of using bubble curtains or screens to dampen underwater noise emissions. The study was in the North Sea (Germany).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Behaviour change (1 study): One before-and-after, site comparison study in the North Sea found that using bubble curtains or screens during pile driving resulted in harbour porpoise detections within 15 km decreasing less compared to before pile driving than at sites without bubble curtains or screens.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
