2712: Use a topless (coverless) trawl
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Trawls may capture significant numbers of unwanted species when they are towed through the water. When a trawl approaches, fish turn and swim in the same direction as the net until exhausted, at which point they enter the net, albeit at different vertical positions. Some species (e.g. haddock Melanogrammus aeglefinus, whiting Merlangius merlangus) swim high in the net and others (e.g. cod Gadus morhua, flatfish) stay low in the trawl (Thomsen 1993). ‘Topless’, ‘coverless’ or ‘cutaway’ trawls are trawl nets with a reduced top panel, or longer headlines than footropes, and exploit these behavioural differences to allow escape of unwanted species by swimming upwards away from the footrope and out of the trawl.
Evidence for similar interventions describing the effects of using modified trawl types to reduce unwanted catch is summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification – Use a separator trawl’ and ‘Use an electric (pulse) trawl’.
Thomsen B. (1993) Selective flatfish trawling. ICES Marine Science Symposium, 196, 161–164.

Key Messages:

Four studies examined the effect of using a topless or coverless trawl on marine fish populations. Two studies were in the North Sea (UK, Norway, Sweden), one study was in the Gulf of Maine (USA) and one study was in the North Sea, Skagerrak and the Baltic Sea (Northern Europe). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (4 STUDIES)

Reduction of unwanted catch (4 studies): Two of four replicated, controlled studies (three paired) in the North Sea, Gulf of Maine, and North Sea, Skagerrak and Baltic Sea found that using a topless trawl, in one case in combination with another non-conventional trawl type, reduced the catch of unwanted Atlantic cod and discards of commercial fish species compared to conventional trawl types. One study found that topless trawls reduced unwanted catches of larger but not smaller haddock and larger Atlantic cod only in one of two cases, compared to standard trawl types. The other study found that discarded catches of one of four commercial fish species were reduced in topless trawls.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
