1763: Use prescribed fire to maintain or restore disturbance
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Regular disturbance may maintain vegetation in a desirable, semi-natural state – particularly in fen meadows and some fens (Middleton 2012). Disturbance can clear dominant plants, maintain light availability and control nutrient levels. This can favour a plant community rich in plant species and/or peatland characteristic species. Therefore, conservationists may sometimes want to actively maintain or restore disturbance. Prescribed burns might be one way to do this.
Burning itself may be the disturbance that has been reduced, as a result of land abandonment or because landscape changes (such as roads or ditches) create fire breaks. Historically, some North American fens burned annually due to lightning fires or intentional burning by humans (Middleton et al. 2006). Burning on some bogs helps to clear dominant vegetation (Norton & De Lange 2003).
Caution: Disturbance is not desirable on all peatlands. Fen meadows and some fens may benefit from disturbance. Many other fens, bogs and peat swamps will not. Natural fires in bogs and tropical peat swamps are rare, occurring every few centuries (Lindsay et al. 2011; Page & Hooijer 2016). Further risks specific to prescribed fires include the difficulty of controlling their intensity, duration and area. Uncontrolled burns can damage seed banks, Sphagnum mosses and the peat itself. Prescribed burns may be best carried out in the winter, when the peat is cold and wet (sometimes frozen), to avoid setting the peat on fire and reduce the risk of fire spreading beyond the prescribed area. Also note that burning might produce apparently desirable changes in vegetation over the short term (e.g. less heather cover and increased herb cover), followed by a rapid return to a degraded state.
Related action: use prescribed fire to control problematic plants whose growth is not attributed to loss of traditional management.
Middleton B.A. (2012) Rediscovering traditional vegetation management in preserves: trading experiences between cultures and continents. Biological Conservation, 158, 750–760.
Middleton B., Holsten B. & van Diggelen R. (2006) Biodiversity management of fens and fen meadows by grazing, cutting and burning. Applied Vegetation Science, 9, 307–316.
Lindsay R., Birnie R. & Clough J. (2011) Burning. IUCN UK Peatland Programme Briefing Note No. 8.
Norton D.A. & De Lange P.J. (2003) Fire and vegetation in a temperate peat bog: implications for the management of threatened species. Conservation Biology, 17, 138–148.
Page S.E. & Hooijer A. (2016) In the line of fire: the tropical peatlands of South East Asia. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 371, 20150176.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects, on peatland vegetation, of using prescribed fire to maintain or restore disturbance. Two studies were in fens and one was in a bog. N.B. Prescribed burning in peatlands with no history of disturbance is considered as a separate action.
Characteristic plants (1 study): One replicated before-and-after study in a fen in the UK reported that burning (along with other interventions) had no effect on cover of fen-characteristic mosses or herbs.
Herb cover (2 studies): One replicated, controlled study in a fen in the USA reported that burning reduced forb cover and increased sedge/rush cover, but had no effect on grass cover. In contrast, one replicated before-and-after study in a fen in the UK reported that burning (along with other interventions) reduced grass/sedge/rush cover.
Tree/shrub cover (2 studies): Two replicated studies in fens in the USA and the UK reported that burning (sometimes along with other interventions) reduced tree/shrub cover.
Overall plant richness/diversity (3 studies): Two replicated, controlled studies in a fen in the USA and a bog in New Zealand found that burning increased plant species richness or diversity. However, one replicated before-and-after study in a fen in the UK reported that burning (along with other interventions) typically had no effect on plant species richness and diversity.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
