3935: Maintain or create bare ground 
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Some butterflies and moths show preferences for exposed areas of ground (e.g. Marschalek et al. 2017, Vogel et al. 2007), which warm up quicker than the surrounding vegetation and can be used for basking/sunning, although other species avoid it (Vogel et al. 2007). Exposed ground can also allow less competitive plants to re-establish, which butterflies and moths may rely on as caterpillar food or adult nectar sources (Howe et al. 2004). Bare ground can be created in a number of ways, including disking (Dollar et al. 2013), turf stripping (Howe et al. 2004) or sod cutting (Sedláková & Chytrý 1999), or by the impact of livestock (Elligsen et al. 1997) or wild mammals (de Schaetzen et al. 2018).
De Schaetzen F., van Langevelde F. & WallisDeVries M.F. (2018) The influence of wild boar (Sus scrofa) on microhabitat quality for the endangered butterfly Pyrgus malvae in the Netherlands. Journal of Insect Conservation, 22, 51–59.
Dollar J.G., Riffell S.K. & Burger L.W. (2013) Effects of managing semi-natural grassland buffers on butterflies. Journal of Insect Conservation, 17, 577–590.
Elligsen H., Beinlich B. & Plachter H. (1997) Effects of large-scale cattle grazing on populations of Coenonympha glycerion and Lasiommata megera (Lepidoptera: Satyridae). Journal of Insect Conservation, 1, 13–23.
Howe M.A., Hinde D., Bennett D. & Palmer S. (2004) The conservation of the belted beauty Lycia zonaria britannica (Lepidoptera, Geometridae) in the United Kingdom. Journal of Insect Conservation, 8, 159–166.
Marschalek D.A., Faulkner D.K. & Deutschman D.H. (2017) Livestock Grazing Shapes the Vegetation Structure and Subsequent Habitat Use by the Endangered Skipper Pyrgus ruralis lagunae (Lepidoptera: Hesperiidae), Environmental Entomology, 46, 445–453.
Sedláková I. & Chytrý M. (1999) Regeneration patterns in a Central European dry heathland: effects of burning, sod-cutting and cutting. Plant Ecology, 143(1), 77–87.
Vogel J.A., Debinski D.M., Koford R.R. & Miller J.R. (2007) Butterfly responses to prairie restoration through fire and grazing. Biological Conservation, 140, 78–90.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of maintaining or creating bare ground. Two studies were in the UK, and one was in each of the Netherlands and the USA.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled, before-and-after study in the USA found that after 1–2 years, grass field margins disked to create bare ground had a similar species richness of both grassland butterflies and disturbance-tolerant butterflies to undisturbed margins.

POPULATION RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Abundance (3 studies): One replicated, randomized, controlled, before-and-after study in the USA found that after 1–2 years, grass field margins disked to create bare ground had a higher abundance of disturbance-tolerant, but not grassland, butterflies to undisturbed margins. One replicated, site comparison study in the Netherlands found that Alcon large blue occupied a similar proportion of heathlands managed with sod cutting and unmanaged heathlands. However, the same study found that Alcon large blues were less likely to occur on heathlands where sod cutting and grazing were used together. One site comparison study in the UK found that a sand dune plot which had been stripped of turf and soil supported a translocated population of belted beauty moths, but a plot which had been strimmed and raked did not.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Use (1 study): One replicated study in the UK reported that 2-3 years after bare ground plots were created, some were used by caterpillars or adult moths of one or more of the grey carpet, lunar yellow underwing, forester and marbled clover, but none by the basil thyme case-bearer.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
