3541: Patrol or monitor nesting beaches
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Female sea turtles are vulnerable to poaching during the nesting season. Human presence on beaches at night can prevent female sea turtles from emerging from the sea to nest or interrupt females while egg laying so that they return to sea.  Once laid, nests are vulnerable to human disturbance and illegal egg collection. Patrols may be carried out at frequent intervals specifically to deter human activities. Scientific monitoring programmes may function as a similar deterrent through the regular presence of officials on a beach.
Many studies report anecdotal evidence of reduced poaching while beaches are being patrolled, but few studies actually test the effect of patrols formally.
See also: Threat: Human intrusions and disturbance – Use nest covers to protect against human disturbance.

Key Messages:

Seven studies evaluated the effects of patrolling or monitoring nesting beaches on reptile populations. Three studies were in Costa Rica and one was in each of the US Virgin Islands, Mexico, Mozambique and the Dominican Republic.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (2 studies): One before-and-after site comparison study in Costa Rica found that olive ridley turtle nests that were moved to a patrolled hatchery and nests that were camouflaged on the nesting beach had similar hatching success. One replicated, controlled study in the Dominican Republic found that on beaches with regular patrols, hatching success of leatherback turtle nests was higher than in nests relocated to hatcheries.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (6 STUDIES)

Human behaviour change (6 studies): Two studies in the US Virgin Islands and Costa Rica found that during years when beach patrols were carried out poaching of leatherback turtle nests decreased. Three studies (including two before-and-after studies) in Costa Rica and Mexico found that when beach patrols were carried out in combination with either an education programme for local communities, limiting beach access or camouflaging nests and moving nests to a hatchery, poaching of leatherback turtle nests and olive ridley turtle nests decreased. One before-and-after study in Mozambique found that during a community-based turtle monitoring project no green turtle egg collection or hunting of adults was recorded.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
