2711: Use a separator trawl
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Capture of fish in trawls depends on the behavioural reaction of fish to the presence of the net. When a trawl approaches, fish turn and swim in the same direction as the net until exhausted, at which point they enter the net, albeit at different vertical positions. Some species (e.g. haddock Melanogrammus aeglefinus, whiting Merlangius merlangus) swim high in the net and others (e.g. cod Gadus morhua, flatfish) stay low in the trawl. In separator trawls, a horizontal net panel is fitted into the trawl net that splits the trawl into upper and lower sections and into separate upper and lower codends. Catch is then separated into each codend, which can be made of different mesh sizes to allow more or less of the catch in each to be retained. For example, in mixed flatfish and haddock fisheries, separator trawls with larger mesh upper codends may allow less unwanted cod to be caught whilst retaining target catches (Ferro et al. 2007).
Evidence for similar interventions describing the effects of using modified trawl types to reduce unwanted catch is summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification - Use a topless (coverless) trawl’ and ‘Use an electric (pulse) trawl’.
Ferro R.S.T., Jones E.G., Kynoch R.J., Fryer R.J. & Buckett, B. E. (2007). Separating species using a horizontal panel in the Scottish North Sea whitefish trawl fishery. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 64, 1543–1550.

Key Messages:

Two studies examined the effect of using a separator trawl on marine fish populations. One study was in the North Sea (UK) and the other in the Atlantic Ocean (Portugal). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (2 STUDIES)

Reduction of unwanted catch (2 studies): One replicated, randomized study in the North Sea found that a separator trawl separated unwanted cod from target fish species into the lower codend, where a larger mesh size allowed more unwanted smaller cod to escape capture. One replicated study in the Atlantic Ocean found that a separator trawl fitted with a square-mesh escape panel caught less of one of two unwanted fish species in a crustacean fishery.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
