3361: Soak trees/shrubs before planting: freshwater wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Soaking vegetation before planting might increase tissue water content, promote root growth and increase survival after planting (Pezeshki et al. 2005). An abundance of roots might help the planted vegetation to take up enough water during dry periods. Adventitious roots may grow from the stem, near the water line, and help with oxygen uptake if the site is flooded or saturated (Havens 1996). Studies do not have to be in flooded/saturated soils, as long as they involve wetland-characteristic species.
To be summarized as evidence for this action, studies must have explicitly compared the performance of soaked and unsoaked plants. Studies that simply report the performance of pruned plants are not summarized here. Studies do not have to be in flooded/saturated soils, as long as they involve wetland-characteristic species.
Related actions: Soak seeds before sowing.
Havens K.J. (1996) Plant Adaptations to Saturated Soils and the Formation of Hypertrophied Lenticels and Adventitious Roots in Woody Species. Wetlands Program Technical Report No. 96-2. Virginia Institute of Marine Science, College of William and Mary.
Pezeshki S.R., Brown C.E., Elcan J.M. & Shields, F.D. Jr. (2005) Responses of nondormant black willow (Salix nigra) cuttings to preplanting soaking and soil moisture. Restoration Ecology, 13, 1–7.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects – on trees/shrubs typical of freshwater wetlands – of soaking them before planting. The study was in a greenhouse in the USA.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE
 
VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Biomass/plant (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in a greenhouse in the USA found that soaking black willow Salix nigra cuttings before planting had no significant effect on the above-ground biomass of surviving seedlings, over the 48 days after planting.

OTHER

Survival (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in a greenhouse in the USA found that the effect, on survival, of soaking black willow cuttings before planting depended on the water regime after planting. However, all cuttings soaked for 15 days before planting died within 42 days of planting.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
