2385: Use non-lethal methods to deter carnivores from attacking humans
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Actual or perceived danger to humans from carnivores can prompt lethal control of such animals. If measures can be introduced to reduce these threats, or threatening behaviour, this could reduce human-wildlife conflict and motivations for carrying out lethal control.
For related studies, see Habituate mammals to visitors and Use conditioned taste aversion to reduce human-wildlife conflict in non-residential sites. Additionally, several other interventions aim to reduce behaviour by wild mammals deemed to be a nuisance (such as raiding garbage containers) and, by reducing the extent to which carnivores and humans come into conflict, may also reduce the chances of attacks on humans. See, for example, Residential and commercial development - Scare or otherwise deter mammals from human-occupied areas to reduce human-wildlife conflict and Prevent mammals accessing potential wildlife food sources or denning sites to reduce nuisance behaviour and human-wildlife conflict.

Key Messages:

Eight studies evaluated the effects of using non-lethal methods to deter carnivores from attacking humans. Three studies were in the USA, two were in Australia, one was in the USA and Canada, one was in Austria and one was in Bangladesh.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Survival (1 study): A study in Bangladesh found that when domestic dogs accompanied people to give advance warning of tiger presence, fewer tigers were killed by people.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (8 STUDIES)
Human-wildlife conflict (8 studies): Two studies, in the USA and Canada, found that pepper spray caused all or most American black bears and grizzly bears to flee or cease aggressive behaviour. One of these studies also showed that tear gas repelled half of American black bears. Two studies in the USA and Austria found that grizzly/brown bears were repelled by rubber bullets or by a range of deterrents including rubber bullets, chasing, shouting and throwing items. A study in the USA found that hikers wearing bear bells were less likely to be approached or charged by grizzly bears than were hikers without bells. A replicated, controlled study in Australia found that ultrasonic sound deterrent units did not affect feeding location choices of dingoes. A study in Bangladesh found that domestic dogs accompanying people gave advance warning of tiger presence, enabling people to take precautionary actions. A study in Australia found that a motorised water pistol caused most dingoes to change direction or speed or move ≥5 m away, but sounding a horn did not.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
