1859: Irrigate peatland (without planting)
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
To avoid desiccation of vegetation on the surface of peatlands, irrigation systems such as sprinklers could be used (Rochefort & Bastien 1998). Water could be recirculated from drainage ditches or ponds on the peatland. Irrigation would maintain a damp peat surface. Irrigation can be expensive so may be best used as a short-term intervention to kick-start restoration.
Caution: A suitable water source, with the right level of nutrients and acidity/alkalinity, must be chosen to avoid altering chemical conditions on the peatland (Lamers et al. 2002). For example, bogs should only be irrigated with water stored on the bog, not ground water. Taking water for irrigation might reduce water levels in neighbouring wetlands.
Key peatland types where this action may be appropriate: bogs, fens/fen meadows, tropical peat swamps.
Related actions: rewet peatlands by raising the water table rather than irrigating the surface; irrigation to complement planting.
Lamers L.P., Smolders A.J.P. & Roelofs J.G.M. (2002) The restoration of fens in the Netherlands. Hydrobiologia, 478, 107–130.
Rochefort L. & Bastien D.F. (1998) Réintroduction de sphaignes dans une tourbière exploitée: évaluation de divers moyens de protection contre la dessiccation (Reintroduction of Sphagnum to an exploited bog: evaluation of various methods for protection against desiccation; in French). Écoscience, 5, 117–127.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects of irrigation (without planting) on peatland vegetation. One study was in a bog and one was in a fen.
Vegetation cover (2 studies): One replicated, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in a bog in Canada found that irrigation increased the number of Sphagnum moss shoots present after one growing season, but had no effect after two. One before-and-after study in Germany reported that an irrigated fen was colonized by wetland- and fen-characteristic herbs, whilst cover of dryland grasses decreased.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
