2915: Legally protect habitat for marine and freshwater mammals
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Legally protecting habitat may reduce degradation by humans. This may in turn increase the abundance and diversity of marine or freshwater mammals that make use of that habitat. Critically important habitats may be protected such as birthing, nursery and feeding grounds, and migration routes. Various spatial designations may be used for protected areas. For example, Marine Mammal Protected Area (MMPA) is a term used to define an area that is specially managed for the protection of marine mammals and their habitats (Hoyt 2010). Protected areas may be many different shapes and sizes, and may vary in the number of species protected and the range of threats addressed (Notarbartolo di Sciara 2016).
Assessing the effectiveness of protected areas is particularly difficult as there may be no suitable controls and appropriate replication can be difficult. Effectiveness is also best monitored over long timescales, but this increases the chance that other factors influence the ecosystem.
The studies summarised below are related to legally protected areas or habitats. Evidence related to the legal protection of marine and freshwater mammals from specific threats are described in the chapter on that threat category. For a general intervention related to legally protecting marine mammal species, see Legally protect marine and freshwater mammal species.
Hoyt E. (2010) Marine mammal protected areas (MMPAs): the global picture. Nascent networks moving toward an interconnected future. Proceedings – First International Conference on Marine Mammal Protected Areas, Maui, Hawaii, 11–13.
Notarbartolo di Sciara G., Hoyt E., Reeves R., Ardron J., Marsh H., Vongraven D. & Barr B. (2016) Place-based approaches to marine mammal conservation. Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems, 26, 85–100.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects of legally protecting habitat for marine and freshwater mammals. One study was in each of the North Atlantic Ocean (Portugal), the South Pacific Ocean (New Zealand), the North Sea (UK) and the Port River estuary (Australia).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (4 STUDIES)

Abundance (2 studies): One before-and-after study in the North Atlantic Ocean found that a population of Mediterranean monk seals increased during eight years after the islands they inhabited were legally protected. One before-and-after study in the North Sea found that a population of bottlenose dolphins was estimated to be a similar size before and after part of its range was protected.
Survival (2 studies): One before-and-after study in the South Pacific Ocean found that the survival rate of Hector’s dolphins was higher after a coastal area was legally protected than before. One before-and-after study in the Port River estuary found that after the area became legally protected a similar number of Indo-Pacific bottlenose dolphin strandings were recorded compared to before protection, but the number of strandings caused by humans decreased.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
