3942: Manage woodland edges for maximum habitat heterogeneity 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Adult butterflies and moths, and their caterpillars, often have different habitat requirements but poor dispersal ability, and therefore creating a varied habitat structure is important for producing habitat suitable for each life stage within a small area (Schultz et al. 2008). Where woodland meets adjacent, open habitat, hard, straight edges provide little habitat diversity for butterflies and moths. Creating a more varied structure to the woodland edge, by felling some trees, encouraging scrub growth, or “scalloping” to increase the length of the edge, may be beneficial to a range of butterfly and moth species.
Schultz C.B., Russell C. & Wynn L. (2008) Restoration, reintroduction, and captive propagation for at-risk butterflies: A review of British and American conservation efforts. Israel Journal of Ecology & Evolution, 54, 41–61.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of managing woodland edges for maximum habitat heterogeneity. One study was in Belgium and the other was in Finland.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in Finland found that two years after felling 5-m-wide woodland edges, and thinning 20-m-wide adjacent forest, the combined species richness of butterflies, diurnal moths and bumblebees was higher than before management or in unmanaged woodland edges.

POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Abundance (2 studies): One replicated, site comparison study in Belgium found that scalloped woodland edges had a higher abundance of brown hairstreak eggs than straight woodland edges. One replicated, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in Finland found that two years after felling 5-m-wide woodland edges and thinning 20-m-wide adjacent forest, the abundance of specialist butterflies was higher than before management or on unmanaged woodland edges.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
