911: Amend the soil with manures and agricultural composts
Effectiveness rating: Trade off between benefit and harms
Background information and definitions:
Soil microbial biomass is the amount of tiny living organisms in a given amount of soil.  Soil microbial respiration is the production of carbon dioxide (CO2) when soil organisms respire (breaking down molecules to produce energy). Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi are a group of fungi that live around the roots of plants. By living together, the fungi and host plant benefit each other: the fungi can live in a habitat without having to compete for resources and have a supply of carbon from the plant, while benefit the plant with an enhanced supply of nutrients, improved growth and ability to reproduce, and tolerance to drought. Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi colonise a wide variety of host plants, including grasses, herbs, agricultural crops and legumes (Bardgett 2005). They are associated with less intensively cultivated and undisturbed soils.
Soil aggregates are groups of soil particles held together by moist clay, organic matter (such as roots), organic compounds (from bacteria and fungi) or fungal hyphae (long, branching structures of a fungus). Some soil particles fit closely together (high soil density), some do not (low density), creating different-sized spaces. These spaces (or pores) within and between soil aggregates can store air and water, microbes, nutrients and organic matter. Large aggregations of particles retain the most nutrients. Since organic amendments act as strong binding agents between particles, mean weight diameter (MWD) of the aggregates (in mm) soils are likely to increase with applications of organic material such as manures and composts. Soil penetration resistance MPa is the soil’s ability to withstand penetration by water or roots. Often with low penetration resistance comes higher hydraulic conductivity, which is the ease with which a fluid (usually water) can move through pore spaces in the soil. Higher hydraulic conductivity is an indicator of a healthy soil.
Excess levels of soluble salts in the soil can adversely affect plant life by changing a plant’s water balance and basic function, resulting in wilting or scorching. Electrical conductivity is a general measure of the soluble salt content or nutrient level of a soil (high conductivity values typically indicate high salt levels). Good quality topsoil should have an electrical conductivity value within the range of 100-1500 microSiemens/cm (μS/cm). Ceramic cup sampling measures the electrical conductivity of a soil, using a vacuum is connected to tubes in the soil. On the end of the tubes are small ceramic cups which filter moisture from the soil when suction is applied.
Ammonium-nitrate is often added to soils as a fertilizer and if plants do not take it up immediately, the ammonium-nitrate gets converted to nitrate by soil bacteria (nitrification) and can be lost from the soil (leaching). A nitrification inhibitor stops or slows down this conversion, and can reduce the loss of nitrate from the soil.
Bardgett R. (2005) The Biology of Soil: A community and ecosystem approach. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
 

Key Messages:
Biodiversity loss: Three controlled, replicated studies from the UK and USA found higher microbial biomass when manure or compost was applied, and higher microbial respiration when poultry manure was applied.
Erosion: One controlled, randomized, replicated study from India found lower soil loss and water runoff with manure application in combination with other treatments.
Nutrient management: Four studies from Canada, Spain, the UK and the USA measured the effect of a variety of manure types on soil nutrient levels. Of these, three randomized, replicated studies (two also controlled) found reduced nutrient loss and higher nitrogen levels when farmyard or poultry manure was applied. One also found lower nutrient loss when farmyard manure (rather than poultry manure or slurry) was applied in winter rather than autumn. One controlled replicated study found higher nitrate leaching.
Soil organic carbon: Four studies (including three controlled, replicated studies (one also randomized) and a review) from India, Japan and the UK found higher carbon levels when manures were applied.
Soil organic matter: One controlled, randomized, replicated study from Turkey found higher organic matter, larger soil aggregations and a positive effect on soil physical properties when manure and compost were applied. Two studies from Denmark and Germany found no effect of manure on organic matter levels.
Yield: Four controlled, replicated studies (including three also randomized) from India, Spain and Turkey found higher crop yields when manures or compost were applied. One study found higher yields when manure were applied in combination with cover crops.
Soil types covered: Clay loam, fine sandy-silty loam, loam, loamy, sandy loam, sandy clay loam, silty loam, and sandy silt loam. 
 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Soil Fertility
Description: Soils Synopsis
