2735: Set a minimum landing size for commercially fished species
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Fishing can impact marine fish through species removal or habitat damage from fishing gear contacting the seabed. Removal of small fish before they have matured and had an opportunity to reproduce limits the overall reproductive potential of the population and can cause severe depletions. The minimum landing size is the smallest fish measurement (usually total length) at which it is legal to retain a fish and is dependent on species (e.g. size at maturity) and sea region. Setting a minimum size at which fish can be landed may help ensure that fish grow to a size that gives them the opportunity to spawn at least once, thus helping to maintain the population. However, to ensure that discarding of fish below a given minimum size is minimized, the size-selectivity of the fishing gear may also need to be improved to better match the size limit.
For similar interventions, see ‘Protect Reproductive Individuals - Set a maximum landing size for commercially fished species’ and ‘Specify a size range of capture for commercially fished species’.

Key Messages:

Five studies examined the effects of setting a minimum landing size for commercially fished species on marine fish populations. One study was a global review and one study was in each of the Tasman Sea (Australia), the Baltic Sea (Northern Europe), the Ionian Sea (Greece) and the Northwest Atlantic Ocean (USA).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (2 studies): One global review reported that one of five swordfish fisheries showed an increase in swordfish recruitment after the setting of recommended minimum landing sizes and catch limits, with recruitment in the other fisheries either highly variable or unable to be assessed. One replicated study in the Ionian Sea reported that, despite established minimum sizes, most fish landed in commercial catches were immature, and thus had never spawned.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (3 STUDIES)

Reduction of unwanted catch (3 studies): One of three before-and-after studies (one replicated) in the Atlantic Ocean, Tasman Sea and Baltic Sea found that following an increase in the set minimum landing size and mesh size of gill nets the catches of the youngest southern flounder were reduced. The other two found that increasing the minimum landing size did not reduce the catches of discarded dusky flathead and Atlantic cod3, and discarding of flathead increased in one of three cases.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
