3267: Introduce tree/shrub seeds or propagules: brackish/saline wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This action involves introducing seeds or propagules of emergent plants to restore/create marshes or swamps. “Propagules” is the term used to describe the seed-like, usually leafless structures produced by mangrove trees to allow them to reproduce and disperse. Seeds or propagules may be collected from plants in greenhouses/laboratories, or from natural sites. They may be sown directly into the soil, scattered over the surface, or carried to suitable sites by water (e.g. after dropping them into the sea during an incoming tide).
Introduction of target vegetation might be useful in severely degraded or bare sites – which may lack remnant plants or seed banks to kick start revegetation with desirable species, and may be at risk of being taken over by undesirable species (Brown & Bedford 1997). It might also be useful in isolated wetlands, far from sources of marsh or swamp plant propagules. Seeds and propagules are easier to handle than plants, and can be a cost-effective way to introduce vegetation to large areas – but they can be more susceptible to herbivory or being washed away (e.g. Schoenholz et al. 2001).
The effects of sowing may be highly dependent on the environmental conditions in each study. Questions you might ask when interpreting the evidence include: Is the study site degraded? Where and when were seeds/propagules introduced? Was there any intervention to improve conditions before planting? What were the conditions over the duration of the study?
The scope of this action does not include sowing nurse plants; sowing submerged or floating plants; sowing to restore bogs, fens, fen meadows or peat swamp forests (see Taylor et al. 2018); or sowing facultative wetland plants in upland sites. In contrast, the scope does include sowing non-native species to conserve marshes or swamps – whilst acknowledging that this is often considered ethically unacceptable due to the risk of invasion (e.g. Ren et al. 2009).
Related actions: Directly plant whole plants; Introduce vegetation fragments; Transplant or replace wetland soil; Restore/create marshes or swamps using multiple interventions, often including planting.
Brown S.C. & Bedford B.L. (1997) Restoration of wetland vegetation with transplanted wetland soil: an experimental study. Wetlands, 17, 424–437.
Ren H., Lu H., Shen W., Huang C., Guo Q., Li Z. & Jian S. (2009) Sonneratia apetala Buch.Ham in the mangrove ecosystems of China: an invasive species or restoration species? Ecological Engineering, 35, 1243–1248.
Schoenholz S.H., James J.P., Kaminski R.M., Leopold B.D. & Ezell A.W. (2001) Afforestation of bottomland hardwoods in the Lower Mississippi Alluvial Valley: status and trends. Wetlands, 21, 602–613.
Taylor N.G., Grillas P. & Sutherland W.J. (2018) Peatland Conservation: Global Evidence for the Effects of Interventions to Conserve Peatland Vegetation. Synopses of Conservation Evidence Series. University of Cambridge, Cambridge.

Key Messages:

Nineteen studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of introducing seeds or propagules of trees/shrubs to brackish/saline wetlands. All 19 studies involved planting mangrove propagules: seven in Asia, five in North America, three in Central America, two in Oceania, one in South America and one globally. Three studies in the USA shared some study sites.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall extent (2 studies): Two studies in the USA and Sri Lanka simply quantified the area of mangrove vegetation present 6–14 years after planting propagules (along with other interventions).
Relative abundance (1 study): One replicated, paired, site comparison study in the USA reported that mangrove forests created by planting propagules (after reprofiling) supported a different relative abundance of tree species to natural forests, after 7–15 years.
Tree/shrub richness/diversity (2 studies): Two replicated, site comparison studies in the USA reported that mangrove forests created by planting propagules (along with other interventions) contained a similar number of tree species to mature natural forests, after 7–30 years.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Tree/shrub abundance (3 studies): Three replicated, site comparison studies of coastal sites in the USA and the Philippines reported that where mangrove forests developed after planting propagules (along with other interventions), trees were typically more dense than in mature natural forests.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Overall structure (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA reported that mangrove forests created by planting propagules (along with other interventions) had a different overall physical structure to mature natural forests, after 17–30 years.
Height (4 studies): Four studies (three replicated) in Thailand, the USA, Mexico and the United Arab Emirates simply quantified the height of surviving mangrove trees for up to 16 years after sowing seeds or planting propagules; in all of these studies, the average height increased over time.
Diameter/perimeter/area (3 studies): Two site comparison studies (one also replicated and paired) in the USA reported that mangrove forests created by planting propagules (after reprofiling) contained thinner trees, on average, than mature natural forests, after 7–18 years. One study in a coastal area planted with mangrove propagules in Thailand reported that the average diameter of surviving seedlings increased over time.
Basal area (3 studies): Three site comparison studies (two also replicated, one also paired) in the USA compared mangrove forests created by planting propagules (along with other interventions) and mature natural forests. Two of the studies reported that planted forests had a smaller basal area than mature natural forests, after 7–18 years. The other study reported that planted forests had similar basal area to mature natural forests, after 17–30 years.

OTHER           

Germination/emergence (2 studies): One replicated study in the United Arab Emirates reported 65–92% germination of sown grey mangrove Avicennia marina seeds, across five coastal sites. One replicated study in a brackish/saline estuary in China reported 38–100% germination of planted mangrove propagules, depending on the species and habitat.
Survival (16 studies): Fifteen studies quantified survival of individual tree/shrub propagules planted in brackish/saline wetlands (or plants originating from them). All 15 studies were of mangroves: in Central/South America, Asia, North America, Oceania or gloablly. All reported survival in at least some cases, from 20 days to 30 years after planting. Five studies reported 100% survival in some cases. However, nine studies reported 0% survival or absence of planted species in some cases. In five studies, survival of seeds or propagules was not distinguished from survival of planted seedlings. Proposed factors affecting survival rates included elevation/water levels, substrate, invertebrate herbivory, use of tree shelters, mechanical stress, oyster colonization, use of guidance, post-planting care and repeated planting.
Growth (5 studies): Five studies monitored true growth of individual trees/shrubs (rather than changes in average height of survivors). All five studies (three replicated) in Australia, the USA, Colombia and the Philippines reported that mangrove seedlings, originating from planted seeds or propagules, grew over time.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
