2151: Modify harvest methods of macroalgae
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
The commercial harvest of macroalgae (e.g. kelp) can impact subtidal benthic invertebrates through removal of the plant itself, direct physical damage and removal of invertebrates, or through disturbance to the seabed (Pirker 2002; Stagnol et al. 2016). The harvest method can be modified in an attempt to prevent such negative impacts. For instance, harvesting macroalgal blades rather than mechanically removing the whole plant can reduce disturbances to the seabed and retain some benefit of macroalgal canopy (Levitt et al. 2002). Increasing the time between consecutive harvests can also potentially help reduce the pressure and allow for natural recovery. Similarly, harvesting patches of macroalgae rather than entire areas can potentially allow natural recolonization of subtidal benthic invertebrates from nearby unharvested patches.
 
Levitt G.J., Anderson R.J., Boothroyd C.J.T. & Kemp F.A. (2002) The effects of kelp harvesting on its regrowth and the understorey benthic community at Danger Point, South Africa, and a new method of harvesting kelp fronds. South African Journal of Marine Science, 24, 71–85.
Pirker J.G. (2002) Demography, biomass production and effects of harvesting giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera (Linnaeus) in Southern New Zealand.
Stagnol D., Michel R. & Davoult D. (2016) Unravelling the impact of harvesting pressure on canopy-forming macroalgae. Marine and Freshwater Research, 67, 153–161.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of modifying harvest methods of macroalgae on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
