2897: Use ‘soft start’ procedures to deter marine and freshwater mammals to reduce noise exposure
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Activities that produce large amounts of underwater noise, such as seismic airgun surveys, pile driving and sonar, may disturb or cause auditory injury to marine and freshwater mammals (Gordon et al. 2003, Bailey et al. 2010). ‘Soft start’ (or ‘ramp up’) procedures may be used when commencing such activities to gradually increase the sound intensity over a period of time. The aim is to deter marine and freshwater mammals from the area before the full volume is reached so that noise exposure and the risk of injury are reduced (Von Benda-Beckmann et al. 2014). For example, seismic surveys may commence with a single airgun, with additional airguns activated over a period of time until the full array is operational. However, this relies on mammals having an avoidance response. Some mammals may be attracted to initially weak sounds and thus exposed to potentially harmful levels as the sound intensity increases (Compton et al. 2008). ‘Soft-start’ procedures may also prolong the total duration of operations, possibly increasing the total amount of acoustic energy that is transmitted into the environment.
Bailey H., Senior B., Simmons D., Rusin J., Picken G. & Thompson P.M. (2010) Assessing underwater noise levels during pile-driving at an offshore windfarm and its potential effects on marine mammals. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 60, 888–897.
Von Benda-Beckmann A.M., Wensveen P.J., Kvadsheim P.H., Lam F.-P.A., Miller P.J.O., Tyack P.L. & Ainslie M.A. (2014) Modeling effectiveness of gradual increases in source level to mitigate effects of sonar on marine mammals. Conservation Biology, 28, 119–128.
Compton R., Goodwin L., Handy R. & Abbott V. (2008) A critical examination of worldwide guidelines for minimising the disturbance to marine mammals during seismic surveys. Marine Policy, 32, 255–262.
Gordon J., Gillespie D., Potter J., Frantzis A., Simmonds M.P., Swift R. & Thompson D. (2003) A review of the effects of seismic surveys on marine mammals. Marine Technology Society Journal, 37, 16–34.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects of using ‘soft start’ procedures to deter marine and freshwater mammals to reduce noise exposure. One study was in each of the South Atlantic Ocean (Gabon), the South Pacific Ocean (Australia) and various water bodies (UK).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (3 STUDIES)

Behaviour change (3 studies): One study in various water bodies around the UK found that a greater proportion of cetaceans (including whales, dolphins and porpoise) avoided or moved away from vessels during ‘soft start’ procedures with seismic airguns compared to when airguns were not firing. One study in the South Atlantic Ocean found that during ‘soft start’ procedures using seismic airguns, a pod of short-finned whales initially moved away but remained within 900 m of the vessel as it passed by. One study in the South Pacific Ocean found that during ‘soft-start’ procedures with a small experimental airgun array, migrating humpback whales slowed their speed towards the vessel but did not significantly alter their course.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
