3894: Provide buffer strips to reduce pesticide and nutrient run-off into margins, waterways and ponds 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
In conventional farming, a wide range of chemicals are commonly applied for pest control or fertilization, but these can have lethal or sub-lethal effects on farmland wildlife, including butterflies and moths (Russell & Schultz 2010, Schultz et al. 2016). Chemicals can spread easily from farmland into adjacent habitats, either by drifting on the wind during spraying, or by leaching through the soil in water. Providing buffer strips with reduced or no chemical applications may reduce run-off into neighbouring habitats, as well as providing additional habitat in their own right.
For studies on restricting chemical applications at the edge of crops, see “Leave headlands in fields unsprayed (conservation headlands)”. For studies on restricting chemical applications across the farm, see “Reduce fertilizer, pesticide or herbicide use generally”. For studies on physically preventing chemicals from spreading to adjacent habitats, see “Use fencing to reduce pesticide and nutrient run-off into margins, waterways and ponds”.
Russell C. & Schultz C.B. (2010) Effects of grass-specific herbicides on butterflies: an experimental investigation to advance conservation efforts. Journal of Insect Conservation, 14, 53–63.
Schultz C.B., Zemaitis J.L., Thomas C.C., Bowers M.D. & Crone E.E. (2016) Non-target effects of grass-specific herbicides differ among species, chemicals and host plants in Euphydryas butterflies. Journal of Insect Conservation, 20, 867–877.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of providing buffer strips to reduce pesticide and nutrient run-off into margins, waterways and ponds. This study was in the UK.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, paired, site comparison study in the UK found that margins next to water bodies managed with restrictions on fertilizer and pesticide use (as well as restrictions on mowing and grazing) had a similar species richness of moths to conventionally managed margins.

POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Abundance (1 study): One replicated, paired, site comparison study in the UK found that margins next to water bodies managed with restrictions on fertilizer and pesticide use (as well as restrictions on mowing and grazing) had a greater abundance of moths than conventionally managed margins.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
