3768: Release captive-bred reptiles into the wild: Sea turtles
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Captive breeding is normally used to provide individuals that can then be released into the wild (often called ‘reintroduction’) to either re-establish a population that has been lost, or to augment an existing population (‘restocking’).
Release techniques vary considerably, from ‘hard releases’ involving the simple release of individuals into the wild to ‘soft releases’ which involve a variety of adaptation and acclimatisation techniques before release, or post-release feeding and care.
This action includes studies describing the effects of release programmes for captive-bred reptiles that do not specifically test the effectiveness of specific release techniques. For studies that compare specific release techniques see Use holding pens or enclosures at release site prior to release of captive-bred reptiles; Use holding pens or enclosures at release site prior to release of wild reptiles and Release reptiles into burrows.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians. See here for: Tortoises, terrapins, side-necked & softshell turtles; Snakes & lizards; Crocodilians or Tuatara.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects of releasing captive-bred sea turtles into the wild. Two studies were in the Gulf of Mexico and one was in the Caribbean.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (1 study): One replicated study in the Caribbean found that eight of over 30,000 captive-bred green turtles released into the wild (around 15,000 reared to one year or more in captivity) were observed nesting and two produced clutches of &gt;100 eggs with hatching success of 63% and 88%.
Survival (3 studies): Three replicated studies in the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean reported that following releases of captive-bred Kemp's ridley turtles and green turtles into the wild, 120–606 of 22,000–30,000 turtles survived for 1–19 years after release.
Condition (1 study): One replicated study in the Gulf of Mexico found that captive-bred Kemp's ridley turtles released into the wild grew by 19–59 cm over 1–9 years.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
