1599: Parrot’s feather: Biological control using herbivores
Effectiveness rating: Trade off between benefit and harms
Background information and definitions:
Both host-specific insects and grass carp have been used for the biocontrol of parrot’s feather with some success (Moreira et al. 1999; Hill & Coetzee 2017), however, also native vertebrate herbivores and livestock can consume invasive aquatic plants and consequently can contribute to inhibit their establishment, growth and expansion (Gassman et al. 2006).
The potential of host-specific insects to act as biocontrol agents depends on their ability to cause harm to the target plant, and may also be limited by the climatic conditions required by the insect species (Gassman et al. 2006). Although several insects have been suggested as potential control agents for parrot’s feather (e.g. the stem-boring weevil Listronotus marginicollis has been found to show a feeding and host preference for parrot’s feather, often killing its terminal bud (Oberholzer et al. 2007)), none seem to be in use. Grass carp Ctenopharyngodon idella consume large amounts of vegetation, and sterile fish have been used for the management and eradication of invasive aquatic plants (Hussner et al. 2017). However, grass carp are generalist herbivores and will consume all palatable plants available to them (Dorenbosch & Bakker 2011, Pine & Anderson 1991). The introduction of non-native control agents, such as herbivorous insects and grass carp, should only be considered following in-depth studies investigating possible undesired consequences to non-target species (Hussner et al. 2017).
Herbivory by both native vertebrates and livestock is often used as a conservation measure in terrestrial habitats. Depending on the dietary preferences of the animals, herbivory can also affect the competitive advantage of aquatic species such as parrot’s feather, and consequently increase biotic resistance of freshwater ecosystems to invasive plants. As an example, herbivory by North American beavers Castor canadensis reduced the abundance of parrot’s feather by 90% (Parker et al. 2007). The impact of terrestrial herbivores may be restricted to the margins of waterbodies or marshy areas, but aquatic and amphibious herbivores such as beavers can affect plant communities further away from water margins.
 
Dorenbosch M. & Bakker E.S. (2011). Herbivory in omnivorous fishes: effect of plant secondary metabolites and prey stoichiometry. Freshwater Biology, 56, 1783-1797.
Gassmann A., Cock M.J.W., Shaw R. & Evans H.C. (2006) The potential for biological control of invasive alien aquatic weeds in Europe: a review. Hydrobiologia 570, 217-222.
Hill, M. P., & Coetzee, J. (2017). The biological control of aquatic weeds in South Africa: Current status and future challenges. Bothalia - African Biodiversity & Conservation, 47, 1-12.
Hussner A., Stiers I., Verhofstad M.J.J.M., Bakker E.S., Grutters B.M.C., Haury J., van Valkenburg J.L.C.H., Brundu G., Newman J., Clayton J.S. & Anderson L.W.J. (2017) Management and control methods of invasive alien freshwater aquatic plants: A review. Aquatic Botany, 136, 112-137.
Moreira I., Ferreira T., Monteiro A., Catarino L. & Vasconcelos T. (1999) Aquatic weeds and their management in Portugal: insights and the international context. Hydrobiologia, 415, 229–234.
Oberholzer I.G., Mafokoane D.L. & Hill M.P. (2007) The biology and laboratory host range of the weevil, Listronotus marginicollis (Hustache)(Coleoptera: Curculionidae), a natural enemy of the invasive aquatic weed, parrot's feather, Myriophyllum aquaticum (Velloso) Verde (Haloragaceae). African Entomology, 15, 385-390.
Parker J.D., Caudill C.C. & Hay M.E. (2007). Beaver herbivory on aquatic plants. Oecologia, 151, 616-625. 
Pine R.T. & Anderson L.W.J. (1991). Plant preferences of triploid grass carp. Journal of Aquatic Plant Management 29, 80-82.

Key Messages:

One replicated, controlled laboratory study in Portugal found that grass carp did not reduce biomass or cover of parrot’s feather.
Two replicated, randomized field studies in Argentina and the USA found that stocking with grass carp reduced the biomass or abundance of parrot’s feather.
One field study in South Africa reported reduced growth of parrot’s feather following the release a South American leaf-feeding Lysathia.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species
Description: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species Synopsis
