2729: Fit a moving device to a trawl net to stimulate fish escape response (stimulator device)
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Trawl nets, particularly in fisheries targeting small crustaceans such as prawns and shrimps, can also catch large amounts of unwanted small fish. To try and reduce this, various ‘bycatch reduction devices’ have been developed that force or encourage fish to escape through specific areas or sections of the net. Introducing an active stimulus, i.e. moving and/or vibrating parts, inside a net may be a way of encouraging fish to approach and make contact with the trawl netting (and thus increase the likelihood of escape through it), and works by creating either a barrier or vibrations that stimulate fish to swim in a particular direction. They may consist of fluttering sections of netting or rope, or tightly strung wires. Active stimulating devices may be used in addition to other bycatch reduction devices such as square mesh windows or grids, to herd fish towards the escape openings.

Key Messages:

Three studies examined the effects of fitting a moving device to a trawl net to stimulate fish escape response (stimulator device) on marine fish populations. Two studies were conducted in laboratory facilities (South Korea) and one study was in the Baltic Sea (Northern Europe). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (3 STUDIES)

Reduction of unwanted catch (2 studies): Two replicated, controlled studies in a laboratory found that trawl nets fitted with moving devices to stimulate fish escape response increased the escape of young red seabream compared to without devices, but for young olive flounder moving devices were only effective at increasing escape when used in combination with another novel device that made the net shake.
Improved size-selectivity of fishing gear (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the Baltic Sea found that only one of three types of moving stimulator devices fitted in conjunction with square mesh escape panels improved the size selectivity for cod, compared to without devices.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
