3195: Deposit soil/sediment and introduce vegetation: brackish/salt marshes
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This section considers studies that examine the combined effects of (a) large-scale deposition of soil or sediment (e.g. waste material from dredging) to form the physical structure of a marsh or swamp and (b) introducing marsh vegetation in any form, such as planting individual plants or sowing seeds. Introducing vegetation may help to stabilize the deposited sediment whilst natural colonization occurs.
Related actions: Deposit soil/sediment to form physical habitat structure, without introducing vegetation.

Key Messages:

Six studies evaluated the combined effects, on vegetation, of depositing soil/sediment to form the physical structure of brackish/salt marshes and introducing vegetation. All six studies were in the USA. Several sites, and even the same data from some sites, were used in multiple studies.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall extent (2 studies): Two replicated, site comparison studies of salt marshes in the USA compared the overall area of emergent vegetation in marshes created by depositing sediment and planting vs natural marshes. One study found that created and natural marshes had similar vegetation coverage after 2–23 years. The other study reported that created marshes had slightly lower vegetation coverage than nearby natural marshes after 2–4 years.
Community types (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that four of four plant community types had similar coverage in created and natural salt marshes after 3–15 years. For most marshes, creation involved depositing sediment and planting herbs.
Community composition (1 study): One replicated, before-and-after, site comparison study in the USA reported that the overall plant community in salt marshes created by depositing sediment and planting herbs/shrubs was &lt;36% similar to nearby natural salt marshes, after 2–4 years.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (1 study): One paired, site comparison study in the USA found that salt marshes created by depositing sediment and planting/sowing herbs typically contained at least as much vegetation (biomass and density) as natural marshes, after 1–4 years.
Individual species abundance (4 studies): Four studies quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. For example, two studies (one review, one site comparison) in the USA found that salt marshes created by depositing sediment and introducing vegetation typically contained a similar amount (density and/or biomass) of cordgrasses Spartina spp. to nearby natural marshes, after 1–9 years. Meanwhile, one paired, site comparison study in the USA reported that whether created marshes contained a higher, lower or similar cordgrass density to natural marshes depended on plot elevation.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Overall structure (2 studies): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that salt marshes created (mostly) by depositing sediment and planting herbs contained larger patches of vegetation with straighter edges than natural marshes, after 3–15 years. One replicated, paired, site comparison study in the USA reported that created salt marshes contained a similar proportion of edge habitat to nearby natural salt marshes, after 2–23 years.
Height (2 studies): Two site comparison studies in the USA compared the height of cordgrasses Spartina sp. in created and nearby natural marshes. One study (also paired) found that created marshes typically contained cordgrass of similar height to natural marshes, after 1–4 growing seasons. The other study reported that cordgrass was shorter in created than natural marshes, after 7–9 years.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
