3306: Add inorganic fertilizer before/after planting trees/shrubs: freshwater wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Inorganic fertilizer can provide nutrients that are in short supply, thereby increasing the initial survival and/or growth rate of introduced plants. Commonly added nutrients include nitrogen (N), phosphorous (P) and/or potassium (K). Fertilizer is usually added immediately before or immediately after planting. It may be sensible to add fertilizer when the focal site is not flooded, to reduce the risk of it dissolving or being washed away.
The effects of this action may be heavily dependent on the study context, especially initial site nutrient levels, the amount of fertilizer added, and when it is added. Adding fertilizer when nutrients are already abundant in a site could cause more harm than good, encouraging the growth of undesirable plants or algae and even inhibiting plant growth (Weinbaum et al. 1992).
Related actions: Add inorganic fertilizer, other than to complement planting.
Weinbaum S.A., Johnson R.S. & DeJong T.M. (1992) Causes and consequences of overfertilization in orchards. HortTechnology, 2, 112–121.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of adding inorganic fertilizer to freshwater wetlands planted with trees/shrubs. Both studies were in the USA.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
                
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE
 
VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in the USA found that adding fertilizer had no significant effect, after two years, on the height of tree saplings planted into floating peat bags.
Diameter, perimeter, area (1 study): The same study found that adding fertilizer had no significant effect, after two years, on the diameter of two of three tree species planted into floating peat bags. However, fertilized pond apple Annona glabra saplings had thicker stems than unfertilized saplings.

OTHER

Growth (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in the USA found that adding fertilizer increased the growth rate of baldcypress Taxodium distichum seedlings planted into a marsh. This was true for both diameter and height growth.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
