3841: Alter mowing regimes on greenspaces and road verges  
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Greenspaces and road verges offer potential habitat patches and corridors for butterflies and moths. However, management of these spaces must be carefully planned. Mowing may be required to keep vegetation down, but also reduces the availability of nectar resources, inhibits the growth of host plants used by caterpillars, reduces the structural diversity of the vegetation, and poses a risk from direct mortality, especially to eggs, caterpillars and pupae (Hopwood et al. 2015). Road verges with a higher species richness of plants attract more butterflies, and yet have fewer butterflies killed by traffic than less diverse road verges (Skórka et al. 2013). Therefore, altering mowing regimes to encourage plant growth and diversity may benefit butterfly and moth populations in urban areas.
See also: “Transportation and service corridors – Restore or maintain species-rich grassland along road/railway verges” and “Pollution – Stop using herbicides on pavements and road verges”.
Hopwood J., Black S.H., Lee-Mäder E., Charlap A., Preston R., Mozumder K. & Fleury S. (2015) Literature review: Pollinator habitat enhancement and best management practices in highway rights-of-way. Federal Highway Administration report by The Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation & ICF International.
Skórka P., Lenda M., Moroń D., Kalarus K. & Tryjanowski P. (2013) Factors affecting road mortality and the suitability of road verges for butterflies. Biological Conservation, 159, 148–157.

Key Messages:

Seven studies evaluated the effects of altering mowing regimes on greenspaces and road verges on butterflies and moths. One study was in each of Finland, the Netherlands, Poland, Germany, the UK, Canada and Sweden.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Richness/diversity (3 studies): Two replicated, paired, controlled studies in Germany and the UK found that less frequently mown or unmown urban greenspaces had a higher species richness and diversity of butterflies and moths than more frequently mown areas. One replicated, site comparison study in Canada found that the management of road verges (and land under power lines) did not affect the species richness of butterflies.

POPULATION RESPONSE (4 STUDIES)

Abundance (3 studies): Two replicated studies (including one paired, controlled study) in the UK and Canada found that unmown public parks and road verges (and land under power lines) had a higher abundance of all adult butterflies and pearl crescent and northern pearl crescent butterflies than regularly mown areas, but the abundance of other butterflies on the road verges (and under power lines) was similar between mown and unmown areas in the second study. One study in Finland found that roadsides mown in late summer had more ringlet butterflies than those mown in mid-summer.
Survival (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in Poland found that road verges mown less frequently, or later in summer, had fewer dead butterflies killed by traffic than more frequently or earlier mown verges.

BEHAVIOUR (2 STUDIES)

Use (2 studies): One replicated, site comparison study in Sweden reported that less frequently mown urban grasslands were more frequently occupied by scarce copper butterflies than more frequently mown grasslands. One replicated, randomized, controlled study in the Netherlands found that butterflies were recorded on verges which were mowed once or twice a year and those which were not mowed, but on mowed verges butterflies were only recorded on those where hay was removed.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
