496: Provide artificial nesting sites for woodpeckers
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Woodpeckers typically nest in hollows in trees. These are normally hollowed out from soft wood. Therefore, if this substrate is lacking in a site, providing it may be beneficial. Providing dead wood and ‘snags’ is described in ‘Natural system modifications’, whilst providing artificial snags, typically made of polystyrene cylinders is described below.
Alternatively, ‘cavity inserts’ can be provided. These consist of a nest box inserted into a tree. Full details of their installation can be found in Allen (1991), but basically consist of cutting a 10 x 25 x 6 cm block out of a live tree and gluing a nest box into place to give the impression of a tree with a hole and a nesting cavity. These inserts are used most frequently to provide nesting habitats for red-cockaded woodpeckers Picoides borealis.
Allen DH (1991) An insert technique for constructing artificial red-cockaded woodpecker cavities. Southeastern Forest Experiment Station General Technical Report SE-73, United States Forest Service. 
 

Key Messages:

Four studies from the USA found local increases in red-cockaded woodpecker Picoides borealis populations or the successful colonisation of new areas following the installation of ‘cavity inserts’ (described above). One study also found that the productivity of birds using the inserts was significantly higher than the regional average.
Two studies from the USA found that red-cockaded woodpeckers Picoides borealis used cavity inserts, in one case more frequently than making their own holes or using natural cavities. One study from the USA found that woodpeckers roosted, but did not nest, frequently in nest boxes.
Five studies from the USA found that some woodpeckers excavated holes in artificial snags but only ever roosted in excavated holes or in nest boxes provided.
A small study in the USA found that modifying artificial nests to allow easy access did not alter the behaviour of birds using them.

 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Bird Conservation
Description: Bird Synopsis
