1070: Ponto-Caspian gobies: Increasing carbon dioxide concentrations
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Addition of dry ice to rapidly deliver a high dose of carbon dioxide, which results in a rapid reduction in dissolved oxygen levels, can sedate some fish species, with minimal residual toxicity.  This may therefore offer a tool enabling selective removal of invasive gobies from waterbodies. This is provided that sufficiently high carbon dioxide levels can be maintained, which may be difficult, particularly in natural water bodies.
Increasing carbon dioxide concentrations by either bubbling the pressurised gas directly into water or by the addition of sodium bicarbonate, has been used to sedate fishes during transport or to allow handling of large numbers of fishes, with minimal residual toxicity (Clearwater et al. 2008). Previous studies have found that exposure to sodium bicarbonate at a concentration of 142–642 mg/litre for five minutes can kill some fish species (Brooke et al. 1978).
Brooke H.E., Hollender,B. & Lutterbie G. (1978) Sodium bicarbonate, an inexpensive fish anesthetic for field use. The Progressive Fish-Culturist, 40, 11–13.
Clearwater S.J., Hickey C.W. & Martin M.L. (2008) Overview of potential piscicides and molluscicides for controlling aquatic pest species in New Zealand. Science for Conservation, 283, 1-74.

Key Messages:

No evidence was captured on the use of carbon dioxide for management of invasive Ponto-Caspian gobies.

'No evidence' for an action means we have not yet found any studies that directly and quantitatively tested this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.
 
 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species
Description: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species Synopsis
