1803: Restore/create peatland vegetation (multiple interventions)
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Peatland creation and restoration schemes can involve many different specific interventions. This section considers peatland creation and restoration using more than three separate interventions at once, such that it is difficult to attribute outcomes to any single intervention. Where three or fewer interventions have been used together in a study, results are reported elsewhere on the website: under each intervention (but noting the influence of the others, where appropriate) or sometimes as a combined intervention (e.g. tree removal and rewetting).
Tree-colonized describes peatlands that would not naturally contain trees. Forested or swamps are used to describe peatlands with natural tree cover. Restored refers to areas where restoration interventions have been applied (i.e. undergoing the process of restoration) rather than the state of those areas (i.e. whether they have been successfully restored).
Key peatland types where this action may be appropriate: bogs, fens/fen meadows, tropical peat swamps.
Related action: restoration using the moss layer transfer technique, a specific combination of multiple interventions.

Key Messages:

Nine studies evaluated the effects of multiple restoration interventions (other than the moss layer transfer technique) on peatland vegetation. Six studies were in bogs (one being restored as a fen). One study was in a fen. Two studies were in unspecified or mixed peatlands.
Plant community composition (3 studies): One replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in the UK reported that the overall plant community composition differed between restored and unrestored bogs. One replicated, controlled, site comparison study in Estonia found that restored and natural bogs contained more similar plant communities than unrestored and natural bogs. However, one site comparison study in Canada reported that after five years, bogs being restored as fens contained a different plant community to natural fens.
Characteristic plants (1 study): One controlled study in a fen in France reported that restoration interventions increased cover of fen-characteristic plants.
Moss cover (7 studies): Five studies (including one replicated, paired, controlled, before-and-after) in bogs or other peatlands in the UK, Estonia and Canada found that restoration interventions increased total moss (or bryophyte) cover. Two studies (one replicated and controlled) in bogs in the Czech Republic and Estonia reported that restoration interventions increased Sphagnum moss cover, but one replicated before-and-after study in bogs in the UK reported no change in Sphagnum cover following intervention. Two site comparison studies in Canada reported that after 1–15 years, restored areas had lower moss cover than natural fens.
Herb cover (5 studies): Five studies (one replicated, paired, controlled, before-and-after) in bogs or other peatlands in the Czech Republic, the UK, Estonia and Canada reported that restoration interventions increased cover of herbaceous plants, including cottongrass and other grass-like plants.
Overall vegetation cover (3 studies): Three studies (one replicated, controlled, before-and-after) in bogs in the UK and France reported that restoration interventions increased overall vegetation cover.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
