1279: <i>Crassula helmsii</i>: Chemical control using herbicides
Effectiveness rating: Beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Application of chemical herbicides may offer a tool for localized management of C. helmsii, provided regulatory approvals are in place. Many herbicides apart from glyphosate are no longer approved for aquatic use in Europe. Vegetation above the water may require a different approach to that below the water, meaning that more than one herbicide may be required to eradicate all C. helmsii from a site. The most commonly-used herbicide on emergent vegetation is glyphosate and on submerged vegetation is diquat. Additives (adjuvants) can be used to improve the efficacy of application of chemical treatments. Retreatment after initial application of herbicide is often required.
The intervention ‘Surround with wire mesh’ discusses the use of mesh to surround treatment sites and minimize spread of disturbed plant fragments during herbicide application.
 

Key Messages:

Seven studies (including one replicated and controlled study) in the UK, found that applying glyphosate reduced Crassula helmsii. In one before-and-after study at a single site glyphosate applied in combination with diquat reduced C. helmsii by 98%. Another before-and-after study at a single site found that covering C. helmsii with carpet before treating with glyphosate resulted in an 80% reduction in the plant.
Three out of four studies (including one controlled study) in the UK found that applying diquat or diquat alginate reduced cover or eradicated submerged C. helmsii. One before-and-after study at a single site found that applying both diquat and glyphosate reduced C. helmsii by 98%. One small, before-and-after trial found no effect of diquat or diquat alginate on cover of C. helmsii. 
One out of two studies (including one replicated, controlled study) in the UK, found that treating submerged C. helmsii with dichlobenil in container trials led to partial reduction in its biomass. One small before-and-after field study found no effect of dichlobenil on C. helmsii.
One replicated, controlled container trial in the UK found that treatment with terbutryne partially reduced biomass of submerged C. helmsii. The same study found reductions in emergent C. helmsii following treatment with asulam, 2,4-D amine and dalapon.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species
Description: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species Synopsis
