3097: Physically damage problematic plants: freshwater swamps
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Physical damage to plants may kill them directly, increase their susceptibility to disease, slow their growth and/or prevent reproduction. This section considers actions, other than cutting and mowing, that physically damage problematic plants. This includes crushing stems, removing seed heads and girdling trees (removing a strip of bark from the entire circumference of a trunk, stem or branch), as well as soil disturbance that damages the underground parts of problematic plants. Removing fragments of the damaged plants might be desirable to prevent regrowth.
For this action, “vegetation” refers to overall or non-target vegetation. Studies that only report responses of target problematic plants have not been summarized.
Related actions: Use cutting/mowing to control problematic herbaceous plants; Use cutting to control problematic trees/large shrubs; Remove surface soil/sediment; Bury surface soil/sediment or Disturb soil/sediment surface other than to control problematic plants.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of physically damaging problematic plants in freshwater swamps. Both studies were in the USA.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One controlled study aiming to restore a swamp in the USA found that ploughing a canarygrass-invaded plot after spraying it with herbicide increased overall plant richness and diversity, two growing seasons later, compared to spraying alone.
Native/non-target richness/diversity (1 study): The same study found that ploughing a canarygrass-invaded plot after spraying it with herbicide had no significant effect on native plant species richness, two growing seasons later, compared to spraying alone.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Tree/shrub abundance (2 studies): Two controlled studies in the USA evaluated the effects, on tree/shrub abundance, of physically damaging canarygrass-invaded vegetation. One study found that ploughing a canarygrass-invaded plot after spraying it with herbicide had no significant effect on the density of non-planted tree seedlings, two growing seasons later, compared to spraying alone. The other study found that managed plots (cut, disked and sprayed with herbicide) contained more non-planted tree seedlings than unmanaged plots, after 1–3 years.
Native/non-target abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled study aiming to restore a swamp in the USA found that plots in which canarygrass-invaded vegetation was managed (by disking, along with cutting and applying herbicide) contained at least as much non-canarygrass herb cover, after 1–3 years, to plots in which vegetation was not managed.
Individual species abundance (1 study): One controlled study aiming to restore a swamp in the USA reported that ploughing a canarygrass-invaded plot after spraying it with herbicide affected the abundance of some individual plant species – other than the target problematic species – two growing seasons later.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
