2526: Install overpasses over roads/railways
Effectiveness rating: Beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Wildlife overpasses are constructed to provide safe road and rail crossing opportunities for wildlife. A range of different structures can be used as overpasses including purpose-built “green bridges”, on which natural vegetation is established, through to multi-use crossings that are accessible to wildlife. Overpasses are often used in combination with wildlife barrier fences that prevent animals accessing the road and which funnel animals toward the overpasses (see Install barrier fencing along roads and Install barrier fencing along railways). Studies summarised within this intervention cover both overpasses created specifically for wildlife and those that were created for other purposes but where information about use of such structures by mammals is included. Studies mostly report on the use of such structures, such as the number of crossings made, rather than on wider population-level effects of their presence.
See also: Install tunnels/culverts/underpass under railways and Install tunnels/culverts/underpass under roads.

Key Messages:

Twenty-two studies evaluated the effects on mammals of installing overpasses over roads or railways. Seven studies were in Canada, three were in Spain, three were in Australia, two were in Sweden, one each was in the Netherlands, Germany, Croatia and the USA, and three (including two reviews) were conducted across multiple countries.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (4 STUDIES)

Survival (4 studies): Four studies (including three before-and-after studies), in Canada, Sweden and Australia, found that overpasses (in combination with roadside fencing) reduced collisions between vehicles and mammals. In two of these studies, data from overpasses and underpasses were combined for analysis.

BEHAVIOUR (21 STUDIES)

Use (21 studies): Nineteen studies, in North America, Europe and Australia, found that overpasses were used by mammals. A wide range of mammals was reported using overpasses, including rodents and shrews, rabbits and hares, carnivores, ungulates, bears, marsupials and short-beaked echidna. A review of crossing structures in Australia, Europe and North America found that overpasses were used by a range of mammals, particularly larger mammal species. A global review of crossing structures (including overpasses) found that all studies reported that the majority of crossings were used by wildlife.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
