1545: Use fences to exclude livestock from shrublands
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Livestock grazing can alter shrubland habitats by changing plant structure, composition, and diversity (Alkemade et al 2013). High grazing pressure can reduce the cover of woody species in shrublands, leading to an increase in grass cover or unvegetated areas. Using fences to exclude livestock from shrublands could reduce the negative impacts of overgrazing.
Alkemade, R., Reid, R.S., van den Berg, M., de Leeuw, J. & Jeuken, M. (2013) Assessing the impacts of livestock production on biodiversity in rangeland ecosystems. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110, 20900-20905.

Key Messages:
 

Two replicated, controlled, randomized studies (one of which was also a before-and-after trial) and one controlled before-and-after trial in the UK found that using fences to exclude livestock increased shrub cover or abundance. Two replicated, controlled, randomized studies in Germany and the UK found that using fences increased shrub biomass or the biomass and height of individual heather plants. Two controlled studies (one of which was a before-and-after study) in Denmark and the UK found that heather presence or cover was higher in fenced areas that in areas that were not fenced. However, one site comparison study in the USA found that using fences led to decreased cover of woody plants. Three replicated, controlled studies (one of which was a before and after study) in the USA and the UK found that fencing either had a mixed effect on shrub cover or did not alter shrub cover.
One randomized, replicated, controlled, paired study in the UK found that using fences to exclude livestock did not alter the number of plant species, but did increase vegetation height and biomass. One controlled, before-and-after study in the UK found that fenced areas had lower species richness than unfenced areas.
One randomized, replicated, controlled, before-and-after trial in the UK and one site comparison study in the USA found that using fences to exclude livestock led to a decline in grass cover. However, four controlled studies (one of which a before-and-after trial) in the USA, the UK, and Finland found that using fences did not alter cover of grass species. One site comparison study in the USA and one replicated, controlled study in the UK recorded an increase in grass cover.
One controlled study in Finland found that using fences to exclude livestock did not alter the abundance of herb species and one site comparison in the USA found no difference in forb cover between fenced and unfenced areas. One replicated, controlled study in the USA found fencing had a mixed effect on herb cover.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Shrubland and Heathland Conservation
Description: Shrubland and Heathland synopsis
