2185: Cease or prohibit aquaculture activity
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Aquaculture systems can negatively impact subtidal benthic invertebrate communities through pollution and diminished water quality (Wu et al. 1994). Ceasing or prohibiting aquaculture activity in an area, for instance by decommissioning farms or relocation to a different area, would remove the source of pollution and potentially allow for subtidal benthic invertebrate communities to recover over time (Johannessen et al. 1994). Aquaculture systems also pose serious environment risks by promoting the spread of non-native, invasive, and pest species and diseases.
Evidence for interventions related to non-native, invasive and pest species is summarised in “Threat: Invasive and other problematic species, genes and diseases – Aquaculture”.
 
Johannessen P., Botnen H. & Tvedten Ø.F. (1994) Macrobenthos: before, during and after a fish farm. Aquaculture Research, 25, 55–66
Wu R.S.S., Lam K.S., MacKay D.W., Lau T.C. & Yam V. (1994) Impact of marine fish farming on water quality and bottom sediment: A case study in the sub-tropical environment. Marine Environmental Research, 38, 115–145.

Key Messages:

Two studies examined the effects of ceasing or prohibiting aquaculture activity on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations. Both studies were in the Mediterranean Sea (Italy and Spain).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Overall community composition (1 study): One before-and-after, site comparison study in the Mediterranean Sea found that after ceasing aquaculture activity invertebrate community composition remained different to that of an unfarmed site.
Worm community composition (1 study): One before-and-after, site comparison study in the Mediterranean Sea found that after ceasing aquaculture activity worm community composition community composition remained different to that of an unfarmed site.

POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Overall abundance (1 study): One before-and-after, site comparison study in the Mediterranean Sea found that after ceasing aquaculture activity overall invertebrate abundance was similar to an unfarmed site.
Worm abundance (1 study): One before-and-after, site comparison study in the Mediterranean Sea found that after ceasing aquaculture activity abundance of health-indicating worms increased, and abundance of pollution-indicating worms decreased.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
