1540: Implement quarantine for people arriving at, and leaving the site
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
This intervention aims to prevent the spread of viral and bacterial diseases from humans to primates and can be implemented in situations where humans regularly come into close contact with primates, such as when researchers or tourists observe habituated primates in their natural habitat. For example, a study by Grützmacher et al. 2017 that assessed the impact of implementing quarantine for people working with habituated chimpanzees Pan troglodytes verus in Taï National Park, Côte d’Ivoire, found that only one of 262 persons tested positive for a respiratory virus (HRSV). However, another 17 persons developed symptoms of infection while in quarantine and were subsequently kept from approaching the chimpanzees, preventing potential disease exposure in 18 cases.
            Other means of preventing the spread of bacterial and viral diseases from researchers/tourists/managers to primates are discussed under ‘Wear face-masks to avoid transmission of viral and bacterial diseases to primates’, ‘Keep safety distance to habituated animals’, ‘Limit time that researchers/tourists are allowed to spend with habituated animals’, ‘Ensure that researchers/tourists are up-to-date with vaccinations and healthy’, ‘Regularly disinfect clothes, boots etc.’, and ‘Wear gloves when handling primate food, tool items, etc.’.
            Implementing quarantine for primates to prevent the spread of viral and bacterial diseases from newly introduced primates to resident primate populations is discussed under ‘Implement quarantine for primates before reintroduction/translocation’.
 
Grützmacher K., Keil V., Leinert V., Leguillon F., Henlin A., Couacy-Hymann E., Köndgen S., Lang A., Deschner T., Wittig R.M., Leendertz F.H. (2017) Human quarantine: toward reducing infectious pressure on chimpanzees at the Taï Chimpanzee Project, Côte d’Ivoire. International Journal of Primatology, 9999, 1–6.

Key Messages:

We found no evidence for the effects of implementing quarantine for people arriving at, and leaving the site on primate populations.

'No evidence' for an action means we have not yet found any studies that directly and quantitatively tested this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Primate Conservation
Description: Primate Synopsis
