2725: Fit a size-sorting escape grid (rigid or flexible) to trawl nets and use a square mesh instead of a diamond mesh codend
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Escape grids are frames of metal, plastics or mesh inserted in or near the codend of trawl nets to try and prevent unwanted species or sizes of catch from entering the codend. They are size selection mechanisms, the sizes at which individuals are sorted dependent on the type of panels and the mesh size and shape. Behaviour of individual fish species may also influence how effective a grid is at allowing escape; some fish will swim upwards in a net whilst others might swim down or to the sides. The effectiveness of escape panels is therefore likely to be dependent on the behaviour, shape, and size of the unwanted fish. Furthermore, constructing the codend using a square shaped mesh instead of a diamond mesh helps to maintain the net’s structure under strain, allowing a greater chance for fish to escape through the gaps of the mesh. Combining an escape grid with a square mesh codend may further increase the chance of fish escape for a greater range of species or sizes.
The effects of using just a size-sorting escape grid or just a square mesh codend in trawl nets are summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification - Fit a size-sorting escape grid (rigid or flexible) to a fish trawl net’, ‘Fit a size-sorting escape grid (rigid or flexible) to a prawn/shrimp trawl net’ and ‘Use a square mesh instead of a diamond mesh codend in a trawl net’, respectively. Similar interventions of various combinations of unwanted catch reduction devices, including escape grids and square mesh codends are summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification’.

Key Messages:

Three studies examined the effects of fitting a size-sorting escape grid (rigid or flexible) to trawl nets and using a square mesh instead of a diamond mesh codend on marine fish populations. The studies were in the North Sea (UK), the Kattegat and Skagerrak (Sweden/Denmark) and the Coral Sea (Australia). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (3 STUDIES)

Reduction of unwanted catch (3 studies): Three replicated, paired, controlled studies (one randomized) in the North Sea, Kattegat and Skagerrak and Coral Sea found that trawl nets with an escape grid and a square mesh codend caught fewer unwanted whiting, plaice, cod, haddock and unwanted catch of the most frequently caught fish species, but not hake or less frequently caught species compared to a diamond mesh codend with no grid. One also found that catch rates of most fish species were similar compared to a square mesh codend alone.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
