3304: Add inorganic fertilizer before/after planting non-woody plants: freshwater wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Inorganic fertilizer can provide nutrients that are in short supply, thereby increasing the initial survival and/or growth rate of introduced plants. Commonly added nutrients include nitrogen (N), phosphorous (P) and/or potassium (K). Fertilizer is usually added immediately before or immediately after planting. It may be sensible to add fertilizer when the focal site is not flooded, to reduce the risk of it dissolving or being washed away.
The effects of this action may be heavily dependent on the study context, especially initial site nutrient levels, the amount of fertilizer added, and when it is added. Adding fertilizer when nutrients are already abundant in a site could cause more harm than good, encouraging the growth of undesirable plants or algae and even inhibiting plant growth (Weinbaum et al. 1992).
Related actions: Add inorganic fertilizer, other than to complement planting.
Weinbaum S.A., Johnson R.S. & DeJong T.M. (1992) Causes and consequences of overfertilization in orchards. HortTechnology, 2, 112–121.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of adding inorganic fertilizer to freshwater wetlands planted with emergent, non-woody plants. Two studies were in the USA, one was in the Netherlands and one was in Ireland. One of the studies in the USA was in a greenhouse.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Individual species abundance (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study of lakeshores planted with bulrushes Scirpus spp. in the Netherlands found that fertilized and unfertilized plots contained a similar amount (density and biomass) of each bulrush species over three growing seasons.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Individual plant size (2 studies): Two replicated, controlled studies (one also paired) in the USA found that adding fertilizer to mineral soil increased the biomass and/or number of shoots of tussock sedge Carex stricta seedlings, 2–3 months after planting. However, in both studies, adding fertilizer had no significant or clear effect on sedge size in plots amended with compost and/or topsoil.

OTHER

Growth (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in tubs of mining waste in Ireland found that adding fertilizer increased growth of planted sweetgrass Glyceria fluitans in one case but had no significant effect in another.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
