3906: Use ‘warmer’ (red/yellow) lighting rather than other lighting colours 
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Artificial lighting disrupts the activity of nocturnal moths. Larger species in particular are more attracted to shorter wavelength light (ultraviolet, blue and green; van Langevelde et al. 2011), and some have been shown to have eyes which are particularly sensitive to ultraviolet and green light (Belušič et al. 2017). Therefore, replacing nocturnal lighting with longer wavelength lights (‘warmer’ colours such as red and yellow) may reduce their impact on moths in areas where lighting is necessary (Gaston et al. 2012).
Belušič G., Šporar K. & Meglič A. (2017) Extreme polarisation sensitivity in the retina of the corn borer moth Ostrinia. Journal of Experimental Biology, 220 (11): 2047–2056.
Gaston K.J., Davies T.W., Bennie J., Hopkins J. (2012) Reducing the ecological consequences of night-time light pollution: options and developments. Journal of Applied Ecology, 49, 1256–1266.
van Langevelde F., Ettema J., Donners M., WallisDeVries M.F., Groenendijk D. (2011) Effect of spectral composition of artificial light on the attraction of moths. Biological Conservation, 144, 2274–2281.

Key Messages:

Five studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of using ‘warmer’ (red/yellow) lighting rather than other lighting colours. Two studies were in the Netherlands and one study was in each of Germany, Slovenia and the UK.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (5 STUDIES)

Behaviour change (5 studies): Four replicated, controlled studies (including one randomized, paired study and two paired studies) in Germany, the Netherlands, Slovenia and the UK found that fewer individual moths, and moth species, were attracted to yellow, green, white or red lights (which in one case also emitted at a lower intensity) than to UV, actinic, blue or conventional metal halide lights. One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the Netherlands found that four moth species spent more time feeding under red lights than under white or green lights, but less time feeding than when in complete darkness.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
