3750: Breed reptiles in captivity: Snakes – Elapids
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Captive breeding involves taking wild animals into captivity and establishing and maintaining breeding populations. It tends to be undertaken when wild populations become very small or fragmented or when they are declining rapidly. Captive populations can be maintained while threats in the wild are reduced or removed and can provide an insurance policy against catastrophe in the wild. Captive breeding also potentially provides a method of increasing reproductive output beyond what would be possible in the wild. However, captive breeding can result in problems associated with inbreeding depression, removal of natural selection and adaptation to captive conditions. The aim is usually to release captive-bred animals back to natural habitats, either to original sites once conditions are suitable, to reintroduce species to sites that were occupied in the past or to introduce species to new sites. Some captive populations may also be used for research to benefit wild populations.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians. See here for other species groups.
For studies that investigate the effectiveness of releasing captive-bred reptiles see Release captive-bred reptiles into the wild.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects of breeding elapid snakes in captivity. Three studies were in Australia and one was in India.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (4 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (4 studies): Three studies in Australia and India reported that 1–4 females elapid snakes produced clutches of eggs in captivity, with 26–93% hatching successfully. One study in Australia reported that two generations of death adders produced litters of 17–25 young in captivity, though 20 were still born.
Survival (2 studies): Two studies in Australia and India reported that two western brown hatchlings survived 2–3 years and 87% of king cobra hatchlings survived one year in captivity.
Condition (1 study): One study in Australia reported that eight of 15 captive-bred western brown snake hatchlings lacked one or both eyes.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (1 STUDY)

Offspring sex ratio (1 study): One study in Australia reported that 55% of captive-bred Australian death adders were female.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
