2704: Modify the design or configuration of trawl gear (mixed measures)
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Fishing using trawls involves towing trawl gear either through the water column or along the seabed, behind one or more fishing vessels. There are many different types of trawl gear and they vary according to the species being targeted and the characteristics of the fished area. However, in general they consist of the main trawl net – made from one or more panels of netting – held open by either a metal beam (beam trawl) or solid doors (e.g. otter boards), attached to the trawl net by long wires (“sweeps” and “bridles”). Trawls often have floats attached to the rope at the top of the net opening (“headrope”) to help keep the net open while fishing and, in the case of bottom trawls, solid discs (“bobbins” or “rockhoppers”) along the rope at the bottom (footrope) to reduce the likelihood of the net getting caught or damaged on the seabed (Grieve et al. 2014). Some trawl gear may be towed as a single, double, or even triple-net configuration. Individual trawl components can be adjusted or modified to improve efficiency and catch rates of commercially targeted species. However, modifications may also reduce the catches of unwanted fish species or sizes. The evidence summarized here covers a range of potential modifications to the configuration of trawl gear or one or more of its many components (e.g. netting length, panel dimensions, footrope and bridle configurations), however, it does not include other potential modifications to the trawl net that deal specifically with reducing unwanted catch and improving size-selectivity (e.g. mesh configuration and unwanted catch reduction devices).
Evidence for interventions describing other modifications to the overall design of different types of trawl gear is summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification - Change the size of the main body of a trawl net’, ‘Decrease the circumference or diameter of the codend of a trawl net’, ‘Modify the design or configuration of trawl doors’, ‘Modify a bottom trawl to raise parts of the gear off the seabed during fishing’ and ‘Modify design or arrangement of tickler chains/chain mats in a bottom trawl’.
Grieve C., Brady D., & Polet H. (2014). Review of habitat dependent impacts of mobile and static fishing gears that interact with the sea bed. Marine Steward Council Science Series, 2, 18-88.

Key Messages:

Nineteen studies examined the effects of modifying the design or configuration of trawl gear on marine fish populations. Seven studies were in the Clarence River estuary (Australia), three studies were in each of the Mediterranean Sea (Turkey) and North Sea (UK), two studies were in the North Pacific Ocean (USA), and one study was in each of the South Pacific Ocean, the Skagerrak and Baltic Sea (Denmark/Sweden), the Atlantic Ocean (USA) and the Coral Sea (Australia). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (19 STUDIES)

Reduce unwanted catch (16 studies): Twelve of 16 replicated studies (seven paired and controlled, five controlled, and two paired) in the Clarence River estuary, South Pacific Ocean, North Pacific Ocean, Mediterranean Sea, Skagerrak and Baltic Sea, Atlantic Ocean, North Sea and the Coral Sea, found that various modifications to trawl gear, including changes to the trawl wires, number of nets, codend number, footrope configuration, front trawl body panels, codend netting layers, spreading mechanism, method of weaving, knot orientation or using a new overall trawl design, resulted in reduced unwanted catches of non-target and/or discarded fish species or sizes, and of all sizes of four of seven commercial species, compared to standard unmodified trawl gear or other trawl designs. One of these also found increased catch rate of one commercial species and for another two species the effect varied with fish size. Two studies found that modified trawl gear reduced the unwanted catch of only a small proportion of the number of individual fish species caught compared to other trawl configurations, and also that unwanted fish catches varied between day/night. One study found that different trawl configurations had mixed effects on the numbers and sizes of non-target fish catch. The other study found no reduction in catches of discarded finfish between a modified and standard trawl codend.
Improved size-selectivity of fishing gear (5 studies): Five replicated, controlled studies in the North Sea and Mediterranean Sea found that various modifications to trawl gear, including changes to the length of the extension piece, the codend strengthening bag, the method of weaving, the number of codend layers and overall design improved the size-selectivity for unwanted (non-target/discarded) fish species or sizes, and annular seabream in one of two cases, compared to unmodified standard trawl gear or other design configurations.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
