2608: Install signage to warn motorists about wildlife presence
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Wildlife crossing signs alert drivers to the potential presence of wildlife on or near a road. They encourage drivers to be more alert and/or reduce the speed of their vehicle, with the goal of reducing animal-vehicle collisions. Motorists may become habituated to signs if they are present all year round, are too common or look similar to other signs. Solutions may be to use temporary seasonal signs, animated signs, flashing lights or flags to catch the attention of drivers. Animal detection warning systems have sensors that detect large animals on or near the road that are wired to flashing signs.
Studies that investigate the effect on vehicle speed of warning signs are not included here if they do not report relevant metrics on vehicle-mammal collision rates (e.g. Lehnert & Bissonette 1997; Al-Ghamdi & AlGadhi 2004) though information on changes in motorists’ speed is reported here if the study also reports collision rates.
See also: Reduce legal speed limit.
Lehnert M.E. & Bissonette J.A. (1997) Effectiveness of highway crosswalk structures at reducing deer-vehicle collisions. Wildlife Society Bulletin, 25, 809–818.
Al-Ghamdi A.S. & AlGadhi S.A. (2004) Warning signs as countermeasures to camel–vehicle collisions in Saudi Arabia. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 36, 749–760.

Key Messages:

Six studies evaluated the effects on mammals of installing signage to warn motorists about wildlife presence. Four studies were in the USA one was in Australia and one was in Canada.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (6 STUDIES)

Abundance (1 study): A before-and-after study in Australia found that when wildlife signs were installed along with speed restrictions, rumble strips, reflective wildlife deterrents, wildlife escape ramps and an educational pamphlet, a small population of eastern quoll re-established in the area.
Survival (6 studies): Three of five studies (including four controlled and three before-and-after studies), in the USA and Canada, found that warning signs did not reduce collisions between vehicles and deer. The other two studies found that warning signs did reduce collisions between vehicles and deer. A before-and-after study in Australia found that wildlife signs along with speed restrictions, rumble strips, reflective wildlife deterrents, wildlife escape ramps and an educational pamphlet, reduced collisions between vehicles and Tasmanian devils but not eastern quolls.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (2 STUDIES)

Human behaviour change (2 studies): Two controlled studies (one also replicated, before-and-after), in the USA, found that signs warning of animals on the road reduced vehicles speeds.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
