1748: Provide new technologies to reduce pressure on wild biological resources
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Providing new, efficient technologies to people who live on or near peatlands, especially in developing countries, could reduce pressure on wild biological resources. More efficient equipment would use less of the natural resource, reducing the amount that needs to be harvested. For example, fuel-efficient stoves have been provided to reduce logging by inhabitants of Indonesian peat swamp forests (Rimba Raya 2017) and peat extraction from Andean bogs (BirdLife International 2013). The effects of these projects on peatlands were not quantitatively monitored. New technologies might also have health benefits e.g. less, or less harmful, smoke produced.
Key peatland types where this action may be appropriate: bogs, fens/fen meadows, tropical peat swamps.
Related action: allow sustainable use of peatlands.
BirdLife International (2013) Lake Junín: protection and sustainable use of High-Andean ecosystems. Available at http://www.birdlife.org/americas/news/lake-jun%C3%ADn-protection-and-sustainable-use-high-andean-ecosystems. Accessed 3 October 2017.
Rimba Raya (2017) Rimba Raya Biodiversity Reserve Project Overview. Available at http://rimba-raya.com/wp-content/uploads/Rimba-Raya-Project-Overview.pdf. Accessed 3 October 2017.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects, on peatland vegetation, of providing new technologies (e.g. fuel-efficient stoves) to reduce pressure on wild biological resources.

‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
