3643: Provide artificial shade for nests or nesting sites
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Providing shade may mitigate effects of temperature increases on incubating nests (e.g. Fuentes et al. 2012).
Studies investigating the effects of moving nests to improve hatching success, or artificially incubating eggs to manipulate sex ratios are discussed in Species Management.
Fuentes M., Fish M. & Maynard J. (2012) Management strategies to mitigate the impacts of climate change on sea turtle’s terrestrial reproductive phase. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 17, 51–63.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects of providing artificial shade for nests or nesting sites on reptile populations. Two studies were in the USA and one was in each of Panama, and Australia.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (3 studies): One of two controlled studies (including one replicated study) in Panama and Australia found that shaded leatherback turtles nests had higher hatching success than unshaded nests. The other study found that shaded and unshaded loggerhead turtle nests had similar hatching success. One replicated, controlled study in the USA found that relocating diamondback terrapin nests to artificial nest mounds and providing shade had mixed effects on hatchling success.
Condition (2 studies): One of two controlled studies (including one replicated study) in Panama and Australia found that greater shade cover resulted in smaller hatchlings for leatherback turtles. The other study found that shading loggerhead turtle nests had mixed effects on hatchling size and crawl speed.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (2 STUDIES)

Offspring sex ratio (2 studies): One of two controlled studies (including one before-and-after study) in Panama and the USA found that shading leatherback turtle nests resulted in fewer female hatchlings compared to unshaded nests. The other study found that shaded and unshaded Agassiz’s desert tortoise nests produced a similar sex ratio of hatchlings.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
