3473: Create groove habitats (1–50 mm) on intertidal artificial structures
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Definition: ‘Groove habitats’ are depressions with a length to width ratio &gt;3:1 and depth 1–50 mm (modified from “Crevices” in Strain et al. 2018).
Groove habitats provide organisms refuge from desiccation and temperature fluctuations during low tide in intertidal rocky habitats (Williams & Morrit 1995). They also provide shelter from predation or grazing (Menge & Lubchenco 1981) and some species preferentially settle into them (Chabot & Bourget 1988). The size and density of grooves is likely to affect the size, abundance and variety of organisms that can use them. Small grooves can provide refuge for small-bodied organisms but may exclude larger organisms, limit their growth and get rapidly filled-up (Firth et al. 2020). Large grooves can be used by larger-bodied organisms but may not provide sufficient refuge from predators for smaller organisms.
Grooves are sometimes present on boulders used in marine artificial structures as a result of quarrying processes (MacArthur et al. 2020). They can also form on structures through erosion, but will often be filled or repaired during maintenance works (Moreira et al. 2007), and are absent from many structures (Aguilera et al. 2014). Groove habitats can be created on intertidal artificial structures by adding or removing material, either during construction or retrospectively.
There is a body of literature investigating the effects of creating groove habitats on experimental artificial substrates on the recruitment and survival of intertidal rocky shore species (e.g. Savoya & Schwindt 2010; van Tamelen et al. 1997). These studies are not included in this synopsis, which focusses on in situ conservation actions to enhance the biodiversity of marine artificial structures.
See also: Create textured surfaces (≤1 mm) on intertidal artificial structures; Create natural rocky reef topography on intertidal artificial structures; Create pit habitats (1–50 mm) on intertidal artificial structures; Create hole habitats (&gt;50 mm) on intertidal artificial structures; Create crevice habitats (&gt;50 mm) on intertidal artificial structures; Create groove habitats and small protrusions, ridges or ledges (1–50 mm) on intertidal artificial structures.
Aguilera M.A., Broitman B.R. & Thiel M. (2014) Spatial variability in community composition on a granite breakwater versus natural rocky shores: lack of microhabitats suppresses intertidal biodiversity. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 87, 257–268.
Chabot R. & Bourget E. (1988) Influence of substratum heterogeneity and settled barnacle density on the settlement of cypris larvae. Marine Biology, 97, 45–56.
Firth L.B., Airoldi L., Bulleri F., Challinor S., Chee S.-Y., Evans A.J., Hanley M.E., Knights A.M., O’Shaughnessy K., Thompson R.C. & Hawkins S.J. (2020) Greening of grey infrastructure should not be used as a Trojan horse to facilitate coastal development. Journal of Applied Ecology, 57, 1762–1768.
MacArthur M., Naylor L.A., Hansom J.D. & Burrows M.T. (2020) Ecological enhancement of coastal engineering structures: passive enhancement techniques. Science of the Total Environment, 740, 139981.
Menge B.A. & Lubchenco J. (1981) Community organization in temperate and tropical rocky intertidal habitats: prey refuges in relation to consumer pressure gradients. Ecological Monographs, 51, 429–450.
Moreira J., Chapman M.G. & Underwood A.J. (2007) Maintenance of chitons on seawalls using crevices on sandstone blocks as habitat in Sydney Harbour, Australia. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology, 347, 134–143.
Savoya V. & Schwindt E. (2010) Effect of the substratum in the recruitment and survival of the introduced barnacle Balanus glandula (Darwin 1854) in Patagonia, Argentina. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology, 382, 125–130.
Strain E.M.A., Olabarria C., Mayer-Pinto M., Cumbo V., Morris R.L., Bugnot A.B., Dafforn K.A., Heery E., Firth L.B., Brooks P.R. & Bishop M.J. (2018) Eco-engineering urban infrastructure for marine and coastal biodiversity: which interventions have the greatest ecological benefit? Journal of Applied Ecology, 55, 426–441.
van Tamelen P.G., Stekoll M.S. & Deysher L. (1997) Recovery processes of the brown alga Fucus gardneri following the ‘Exxon Valdez’ oil spill: settlement and recruitment. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 160, 265–277.
Williams G.A. & Morritt D. (1995) Habitat partitioning and thermal tolerance in a tropical limpet, Cellana grata. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 124, 89–103.

Key Messages:

Fourteen studies examined the effects of creating groove habitats on intertidal artificial structures on the biodiversity of those structures. Seven studies were in estuaries in southeast Australia, the UK and Hong Kong, four were on open coastlines in the UK and the Netherlands, two were on island coastlines in the Singapore Strait, and one was in a port in the Netherlands.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (11 STUDIES)

Overall community composition (3 studies): Two of three replicated, controlled studies (including one randomized and two before-and-after studies) in Australia and the UK found that creating groove habitats on intertidal artificial structures did not alter the combined macroalgae and invertebrate community composition on structure surfaces. However, one of these studies reported that grooves supported macroalgae, mobile and non-mobile invertebrate species that were absent from structure surfaces without grooves. One study found that creating grooves did alter the community composition.
Fish community composition (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in Singapore found that groove habitats created on an intertidal artificial structure, along with pits, altered the fish community composition on and around structure surfaces, and supported species that were absent from surfaces without grooves and pits.
Overall richness/diversity (8 studies): Three of six replicated, controlled studies (including two randomized and two before-and-after studies) in the UK and Singapore found that creating groove habitats on intertidal artificial structures, along with pits in one study, increased the combined macroalgae and invertebrate species richness and/or diversity on structure surfaces. Two studies found that creating grooves did not increase their species richness. One found that creating grooves, along with pits, had mixed effects on species richness depending on the site. One of the studies found that increasing the density and fragmentation of grooves, along with pits, had mixed effects on species richness. Two replicated studies (including one randomized, paired sites study) in Hong Kong and Australia found that grooves supported higher species richness than small ridges or ledges created in between them, but one found that species diversity in grooves vs ridges varied depending on the groove depth.
Algal richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, paired sites, controlled study in Australia found that creating groove habitats on intertidal artificial structures did not increase the macroalgal species richness on structure surfaces.
Invertebrate richness/diversity (3 studies): Two replicated, controlled studies (including one randomized and one paired sites study) in Australia found that creating groove habitats on intertidal artificial structures did not increase the species richness of mobile or non-mobile invertebrates or limpets on structure surfaces. One replicated study in Australia found that grooves supported higher mobile invertebrate species richness than small ledges created in between them.
Fish richness/diversity (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in Singapore found that creating groove habitats on an intertidal artificial structure, along with pits, increased the fish species richness on and around structure surfaces. One replicated study in Australia found that grooves supported similar fish species richness to small ledges created in between them.

POPULATION RESPONSE (9 STUDIES)

Overall abundance (4 studies): Two of three replicated, controlled studies (including one randomized and two before-and-after studies) in the UK and Singapore found that creating groove habitats on intertidal artificial structures, along with pits in one study, increased the combined macroalgae and invertebrate abundance on structure surfaces. One found that creating grooves did not increase their abundance. One replicated study in Australia found that grooves supported similar abundances to small ledges created in between them.
Algal abundance (2 studies): Two replicated, paired sites, controlled studies in the Netherlands reported that creating groove habitats on intertidal artificial structures did not increase the macroalgal abundance on structure surfaces.
Invertebrate abundance (6 studies): Three of four replicated, controlled studies (including two randomized and two paired sites studies) in Australia, the Netherlands and the UK found that creating groove habitats on intertidal artificial structures did not increase the invertebrate, limpet or chiton abundances on structure surfaces. One study found that creating grooves, along with pits, had mixed effects on mobile invertebrate and barnacle abundances, depending on the site. One replicated, paired sites, controlled study in Australia reported that grooves supported non-mobile invertebrates more frequently than structure surfaces without grooves, but not mobile invertebrates. One replicated study in Australia found that grooves supported higher mobile invertebrate and oyster abundances than small ledges created in between them.
Fish abundance (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in Singapore found that creating groove habitats on an intertidal artificial structure, along with pits, increased the fish abundance on and around structure surfaces. One replicated study in Australia found that grooves supported similar fish abundance to small ledges created in between them.

BEHAVIOUR (2 STUDIES)

Use (1 study): One replicated, paired sites, controlled study in the Netherlands reported that groove habitats created on an intertidal artificial structure were used by mussels and periwinkles.
Fish behaviour change (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in Singapore found that creating groove habitats on an intertidal artificial structure, along with pits, increased the number of bites fishes took from structure surfaces.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Biodiversity of Marine Artificial Structures
Description: Enhancing biodiversity of marine artificial structures synopsis
