3975: Manage hedgerows to benefit wildlife (e.g. no spray, gap-filling and laying) 
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Despite being originally man-made, hedgerows provide an important source of semi-natural habitat within the farmed landscape. In Europe, conventional hedgerow management consists of annual cutting to a standard shape and size, which is unlikely to encourage the diversity of growth and resources needed by butterflies and moths. The timing of hedgerow cutting may be important for some species, depending on whether they are in a life-stage which is actively using the hedgerow and how easily it can disperse (Waring 2004). On the other hand, unmanaged hedgerows can become too overgrown, and gaps can appear over time. Hedgerows with more gaps attract fewer meadow brown Maniola jurtina butterflies than continuous hedgerows (Pywell et al. 2004). Agri-environment schemes recommend a diversity of hedgerow management techniques, including gap-filling, reduced mowing at the base, less frequent cutting (once every two or three years), and advise cutting at specific times of years (often in winter, Facey et al. 2014).
For studies on planting new hedgerows, see “Plant new hedges”. For studies on reducing chemical applications alone, see “Pollution – Reduce fertilizer, pesticide or herbicide use generally” and “Pollution – Convert to organic farming”.
Facey S.L., Botham M.S., Heard M.S., Pywell R.F. & Staley J.T. (2014) Moth communities and agri-environment schemes: Examining the effects of hedgerow cutting regime on diversity, abundance, and parasitism. Insect Conservation and Diversity, 7, 543–552.
Pywell R.F., Warman E.A., Sparks T.H., Greatorex-Davies J.N., Walker K.J., Meek W.R., Carvell C., Petit S. & Firbank L.G. (2004) Assessing habitat quality for butterflies on intensively managed arable farmland. Biological Conservation, 118, 313–325.
Waring P. (2004) Successes in conserving the Barberry Carpet moth Pareulype berberata (D. & S.) (Geometridae) in England. Journal of Insect Conservation, 8, 167–171.

Key Messages:

Seventeen studies evaluated the effects of managing hedgerows to benefit wildlife on butterflies and moths. Fourteen studies were in the UK, and one was in each of Belgium, Costa Rica and Italy.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (9 STUDIES)

Richness/diversity (9 studies): Three replicated, site comparison studies in the UK and Costa Rica found that hedgerows with trees or a more complex structure had a higher species richness or diversity of butterflies and macro-moths than simpler hedgerows without trees. Three of six replicated studies (including three randomized, paired, controlled studies, one randomized, site comparison, and two site comparison studies) in the UK and Italy found that hedgerows cut to allow incremental growth had a higher diversity of caterpillars and pupae than hedgerows cut to the same size, that hedgerows kept between 1–2 m tall had a higher species richness of butterflies than hedgerows kept below 1 m tall and that fields with hedgerows of a larger volume had higher species richness of butterflies than those with hedgerows of a smaller volume, but only in one of two study years. The other three studies found that hedgerows managed according to agri-environment scheme prescriptions (including less frequent or winter cutting, gap-filling and restricted mowing, in one case in combination with other agri-environment scheme habitat) had a similar species richness of butterflies and moths to conventionally managed hedgerows.

POPULATION RESPONSE (17 STUDIES)

Abundance (17 studies): Four of six replicated studies (including four randomized, paired, controlled studies, one controlled study, and one paired, site comparison study) in the UK found that hedgerows cut once every 2–3 years, cut in autumn, or cut to allow incremental growth, had a higher abundance of adult butterflies and moths, moth caterpillars and pupae and brown hairstreak eggs than hedgerows cut to the same size every winter. However, one of these studies also found that hedgerows cut to allow incremental growth had a similar abundance of moth caterpillars and pupae to hedgerows cut to the same size. The other two studies found that hedgerows managed by gap-filling and cutting every three years had a similar abundance of moths to conventionally managed hedgerows, and that hedgerows cut in winter, or less frequently in autumn, had more concealed moth caterpillars, but a similar abundance of free-living caterpillars, to hedgerows cut annually in autumn. Three of five replicated, site comparison studies (including one paired study) in the UK and Costa Rica found that hedgerows with trees had a similar total abundance of macro-moths to hedgerows without trees. The other two studies found that hedgerows with trees, or with a more complex structure, had a higher abundance of butterflies and pale shining brown moths than simple hedgerows. Two replicated, site comparison studies in Belgium and Italy found that hedgerows managed with scalloped edges, or maintained at below 1 m tall, had more brown hairstreak eggs and a higher abundance of adult butterflies, than hedgerows with straight edges or allowed to grow over 2 m tall. One of two studies (including one controlled and one replicated, site comparison study) in the UK found that laid or coppiced hedgerows had a higher abundance of butterflies than unmanaged hedgerows. The other study found that managed hedgerows had a lower abundance of caterpillars than remnant hedgerows. One replicated, randomized, site comparison study in the UK found that butterfly abundance was higher in fields with hedgerows of a larger volume, but only in one of two study years. One replicated, site comparison study in the UK found that field margins next to hedgerow trees had a higher abundance of most shrub- and tree-feeding, but not grass- and herb-feeding, moth species than margins away from hedgerow trees.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
