825: Remove or control invasive bullfrogs
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
The American bullfrog Rana catesbeiana has been introduced to many parts of the world. The species is relatively large and adaptable and has significant effects on some native species through competition for resources and predation.
There is additional literature that is not included here examining the success of controlling bullfrogs, which may be undertaken for the conservation of a range of taxa including amphibians (e.g. Banks et al. 2000; Orchard 2011; Louette 2012). For example, one modelling study found that culling bullfrog metamorphs in autumn was the most effective method of decreasing population growth rate (Govindarajulu et al. 2005). A review suggested that an indirect approach, by managing habitat rather than directly controlling bullfrogs, may be a more effective way to reduce the effects of bullfrogs on native amphibians (Adams & Pearl 2007). For the success of control of American bullfrogs see the Control of Freshwater Invasive Species synopsis.
Adams M.J. & Pearl C.A. (2007) Problems and opportunities managing invasive bullfrogs: is there any hope? 679–693 in: F. Gherardi (eds) Biological invaders in inland waters: profiles, distribution and threats, Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Banks B., Foster J., Langton T. & Morgan K. (2000) British bullfrogs? British Wildlife, 11, 327–330.
Govindarajulu P., Altwegg R. & Anholt B.R. (2005) Matrix model investigation of invasive species control: bullfrogs on Vancouver Island. Ecological Applications, 15, 2161–2170.
Louette G. (2012) Use of a native predator for the control of an invasive amphibian. Wildlife Research, 39, 271–278.
Orchard S.A. (2011) Removal of the American bullfrog Rana (Lithobates) catesbeiana from a pond and a lake on Vancouver Island,  British Columbia, Canada. Pages 217–221 in: C. R. Veitch, M. N. Clout & D. R. Towns (eds) Island invasives: eradication and management. , IUCN, Gland, Switzerland.
 
 

Key Messages:

One replicated, before-and-after study in the USA found that removing American bullfrogs significantly increased a population of California red-legged frogs. 
One before-and-after study in the USA and Mexico found that eradicating bullfrogs from the area increased the range of leopard frogs. One replicated, before-and-after study in the USA found that once bullfrogs had been removed, California red-legged frogs were found out in the open twice as frequently.

 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Amphibian Conservation
Description: Amphibian Synopsis
