2075: Cease or prohibit marine mining
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Marine mining involves the retrieval of minerals from the seabed, usually through dredging. While certain minerals mostly occur in the deep sea, where mining is yet to be undertaken at an industrial scale, offshore and coastal mining does occur in parts of the world (Miller et al. 2018). Mining can have negative impacts on subtidal benthic invertebrates through physical disturbances from dredging operations, chemical contamination, and changes in sediment characteristics (Jewett et al. 1999). Mining could be ceased (for instance following end of licence or voluntary cessation of activities) or prohibited (through legislation) in an area, and the site and its invertebrates left to naturally recover over time (Jewett et al. 1999).
 
Jewett S.C., Feder H.M. & Blanchard A. (1999) Assessment of the benthic environment following offshore placer gold mining in the northeastern Bering Sea. Marine Environmental Research, 48, 91–122.
Miller K.A., Thompson K.F., Johnston P. & Santillo D. (2018) An overview of seabed mining including the current state of development, environmental impacts, and knowledge gaps. Frontiers in Marine Science, 4, 418.

Key Messages:

One study examined the effects of ceasing or prohibiting mining on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations. The study was in the Bering Sea (USA).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Overall community composition (1 study): One site comparison study in the Bering Sea found that following cessation of gold mining, overall invertebrate community composition became similar to that of an unmined site.
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One  site comparison study in the Bering Sea found that following cessation of gold mining, overall invertebrate richness and diversity became similar to that of an unmined site.

POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Overall abundance (1 study): One site comparison study in the Bering Sea found that following cessation of gold mining, overall invertebrate abundance and biomass became similar to that of an unmined site.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
