718: Use alley cropping
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
This agroforestry intervention grows crops between hedgerows or tree lines planted at regular intervals across crop fields or along slope contours. Hedges may be pruned and the foliage used as mulch or green manure on the adjacent crop alleys. The technique may control weeds and insect pests in a number of ways, for example by modifying the field’s climate, disrupting pest movement and weed growth, increasing crop vigour, providing habitat for natural enemies and using the insecticidal properties of hedgerow foliage. Studies that plant/allow trees around the edges of fields are included in 'Plant new hedges'.
Here we present eight of 10 studies testing this intervention.

Key Messages:
Parasitism, infection and predation: Two of four studies from Kenya and the USA (including three randomised, replicated, controlled trials) found that effects of alley cropping on parasitism varied between study sites, sampling dates, pest life stages or the width of crop alleys. Two studies found no effect on parasitism. One study found mixed effects on fungal infections in pests and one study found lower egg predation. Natural enemies: One randomised, replicated, controlled study from Kenya found more wasps and spiders but fewer ladybirds. Some natural enemy groups were affected by the types of trees used in hedges. Pests and crop damage: Two of four replicated, controlled studies (two also randomised) from Kenya, the Philippines and the UK found more pests in alley cropped plots. One study found fewer pests and one study found effects varied with pest group and between years. One study found more pest damage to crops but another study found no effect. Weeds: One randomised, replicated, controlled study from the Philippines found mixed effects on weeds, with more grasses in alley cropped than conventional fields under some soil conditions. Yield: One controlled study from the USA found lower yield and one study from the Philippines reported similar or lower yields. Costs and profit: One study from the USA found lower costs but also lower profit in alley cropped plots.
Crops studied were alfalfa, barley, cowpea, maize, pea, rice and wheat.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Natural Pest Control
Description: Natural Pest Control Synopsis
