3713: Manage vegetation by cutting or mowing
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Vegetation may be managed by cutting or mowing as part of habitat restoration to reduce shading or prevent natural succession where specific habitat types are desired, or where invasive species are out-competing native species. A range of tools may be used for such management, from machetes and billhooks, to chainsaws, strimmers and brush cutters.
Removing vegetation may also be used as a substitute for prescribed fire to eliminate competing mid-storey or ground vegetation. Although this technique does not have the multiple ecosystem functions provided by fire, it has advantages, such as increased selectivity and decreased risk of offsite fire damage.
Here we present studies that remove both native and non-native species, ranging from grasses and other herbaceous plants, to woody shrubs and canopy vegetation. Studies that investigate the effects of removing vegetation as one of a combination of restoration management actions are discussed in the actions under the subsection Whole habitat restoration.
For studies that combine cutting or mowing vegetation with prescribed burning, see Threat: Natural system modifications – Use prescribed burning in combination with vegetation cutting.
For studies discussing the effects of grazing as part of habitat restoration, see Manage vegetation using livestock grazing. For studies discussing the effects of managing vegetation by hand or using herbicides, see Manage vegetation by hand (selective weeding) and Manage vegetation using herbicide.

Key Messages:

Seven studies evaluated the effects of managing vegetation by cutting or mowing on reptile populations. Five studies were in the USA, one was in Australia, and one was in Spain.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Richness/diversity (3 studies): Three replicated, randomized, controlled studies (including one before-and-after study) in the USA found that areas where vegetation was managed by cutting had similar reptile species richness compared to areas with no cutting.

POPULATION RESPONSE (5 STUDIES)

Abundance (4 studies): Three of four replicated, controlled studies (including three randomized studies) in the USA found that areas where vegetation was managed by cutting had similar reptile abundance compared to areas with no cutting. The other study found that densities of eastern Massassauga rattlesnakes were higher after cutting during the first three years, but similar after four years.
Condition (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled, before-and-after study in Spain found that an adapted brush cutter caused less damage to tortoise carcasses than a conventional brush cutter.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDIES)

Use (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in Australia found that after cutting back canopy vegetation, reptiles used unshaded rocks more often than shaded rocks in winter but not spring. One randomized study in the USA found that mown areas were used for nesting by Blanding’s turtles less frequently than tilled areas.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
