3156: Manage fertilizer or herbicide application
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
An excess of fertilizers and herbicides can have negative effects on vegetation. Herbicides can kill plants directly. An excess of nutrients, such as nitrogen and phosphorous, can alter the competitive balance in marshes and swamps leading to domination by single species (Tilman et al. 1999) or algal blooms (Smith et al. 2006). For many marshes and swamps, problems are related to chronic spillover of chemicals from agricultural or domestic land. Nutrient pollution is especially severe where a large proportion of the land is cultivated, e.g. in Europe, eastern North America and southeast China (Verhoeven et al. 2006). In some cases, e.g. rice paddies, excess chemical application could affect vegetation during the growing season and/or fallow periods.
Various techniques could be used to reduce these problems, without reducing the overall amount applied (although this could also be beneficial; Section 10.6). Applying fertilizers when plants are actively growing means a greater proportion of the nutrients are taken up by the plants. Within watersheds, avoiding application before heavy rain reduces the amount that is immediately washed away. Ultimately, better chemical management could be driven by legislation, financial incentives and/or education.
Related actions: Reduce fertilizer or herbicide use, without other management of its application (freshwater marshes – brackish/salt marshes – freshwater swamps – brackish/saline swamps). In practice, that action and the current one will often be used simultaneously.
Smith V.H., Joye S.B. & Howarth R.W. (2006) Eutrophication of freshwater and marine ecosystems. Limnology and Oceanography, 51, 351–355.
Tilman E.A., Tilman D., Crawley M.J. & Johnston A.E. (1999) Biological weed control via nutrient competition: potassium limitation of dandelions. Ecological Applications, 9, 103–111.
Verhoeven J.T.A., Arheimer B., Yin C. & Hefting M.M. (2006) Regional and global concerns over wetlands and water quality. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 21, 96–103.

Key Messages:
We found no studies that evaluated the effects, on vegetation in marshes or swamps, of managing fertilizer or herbicide use in these habitats or adjacent areas.
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
