2202: Limit, cease or prohibit discharge of solid waste overboard from vessels
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Commercial and recreational vessels can generate large amounts of garbage and solid waste (Butt 2007). Wastes discharged overboard from vessels can sink to the seabed and impact subtidal benthic invertebrates through the introduction of bacteria, excess nutrients, toxic substances and solid particles. Limiting, ceasing or prohibiting the discharge of waste overboard from vessels in an area may reduce or stop the source of pollution and allow subtidal benthic invertebrates to recover over time. However, solid waste can accumulate and subsist in the marine environment for a long time due to very slow degradation (Andrady 2015; Pham et al. 2014), and limiting, ceasing or prohibiting discharge alone might not be sufficient.
Evidence for intervention related to the discharge of waste effluents is summarised under “Threat: Pollution – Limit, cease or prohibit discharge of waste effluents overboard from vessels”.
 
Andrady A.L. (2015) Persistence of plastic litter in the oceans. Pages 57–72 in: Marine anthropogenic litter. Springer, Cham.
Butt N. (2007) The impact of cruise ship generated waste on home ports and ports of call: A study of Southampton. Marine Policy, 31, 591–598.
Pham C.K., Ramirez-Llodra E., Alt C.H., Amaro T., Bergmann M., Canals M., Davies J., Duineveld G., Galgani F., Howell K.L. & Huvenne V.A. (2014) Marine litter distribution and density in European seas, from the shelves to deep basins. PloS One, 9, p.e95839.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of limiting, ceasing or prohibiting discharge of solid waste overboard from vessels on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
