2191: Leave a fallow period during fish/shellfish farming
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Aquaculture systems can negatively impact invertebrate subtidal communities through pollution and diminished water quality (Wu et al. 1994). Fallow periods (temporary cessation of production) are often used in aquaculture to mitigate the environmental effects of pollution from organic enrichment due to the stocking of fish, i.e. wastes from fish food and faeces. By temporarily stopping production, pollution is reduced, potentially allowing invertebrate subtidal communities to naturally recover over time until production is resumed (Lin & Bailey-Brock 2008; Zhulay et al. 2015).
Other evidence related to aquaculture activities are summarised under “Threat: Pollution – Aquaculture” including “Cease or prohibit aquaculture activity”.
 
Lin D.T. & Bailey-Brock J.H. (2008) Partial recovery of infaunal communities during a fallow period at an open-ocean aquaculture. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 371, 65–72.
Wu R.S.S., Lam K.S., MacKay D.W., Lau T.C. & Yam V. (1994) Impact of marine fish farming on water quality and bottom sediment: A case study in the sub-tropical environment. Marine Environmental Research, 38, 115–145.
Zhulay I., Reiss K. & Reiss H. (2015) Effects of aquaculture fallowing on the recovery of macrofauna communities. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 97, 381–390.

Key Messages:

Three studies examined the effects of leaving a fallow period during fish farming on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations. Two studies were in the Tasman Sea (Australia), and one in the North Pacific Ocean (USA).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Overall community composition (2 study): Two replicated, before-and-after, site comparison study in the Tasman Sea found that after a fallow period invertebrate community composition became similar to that occurring before the fish were added but remained different to communities at sites without fish farms.
Worm community composition (1 study): One replicated, before-and-after, site comparison study in the North Pacific Ocean found that after a fallow period polychaete worm community composition changed but remained different to communities at sites without fish farms.
Worm richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, before-and-after, site comparison study in the North Pacific Ocean found that after a fallow period polychaete worm diversity did not change and remained lower compared to sites without fish farms.

POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Worm abundance (2 studies): Two replicated, before-and-after, site comparison studies in the Tasman Sea and the North Pacific Ocean found that following a fallow period, abundances of pollution-indicator polychaete worms decreased, but remained higher compared to sites without fish farms.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
