2696: Attach an electropositive deterrent to fishing gear
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Many fishing gears, as well as catching target commercial species, catch unwanted species. These may be species for which a quota has been reached, those of conservation concern or species that hold no commercial value. Fishing gears may be fitted with devices or substances that exploit a species’ natural reaction to sensory stimulation to deter them from interacting with fishing gear and reduce incidental catch. Elasmobranchs (sharks, skates and rays), for example, have specialized electroreceptors that aid in the detection of prey, predators and potential mates (Rivera-Vicente et al. 2011), and fitting electropositive metals and/or permanent magnets (i.e. substances that generate an electrical or magnetic field) to fishing gear may elicit avoidance behaviour to gears or baits in such species.
Evidence for similar deterrent devices on fishing gear is summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification - Use artificial light on fishing gear’.
Rivera-Vicente A.C., Sewell J. & Tricas T.C. (2011) Electrosensitive spatial vectors in elasmobranch fishes: implications for source localization. PLoS One, 6, e16008.

Key Messages:

Nine studies examined the effect of attaching an electropositive deterrent to fishing gear on marine fish populations. Three studies were in the Atlantic Ocean (USA, Canada, Bahamas). One study was in each of the Gulf of Alaska (USA), the South Pacific Ocean (Australia) and the Tasman Sea (Australia). One study was a global systematic review and two studies were in laboratory facilities (USA). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (4 STUDIES)

Behaviour change (4 studies): Three of four replicated studies (one paired and controlled, one randomized and controlled, one randomized, and one controlled) in the Atlantic Ocean, Tasman Sea, and in laboratory conditions, found that the presence of potentially deterrent materials attached near the bait reduced the frequency of feeding attempts and bait consumption of spiny dogfish, great hammerhead and draughtboard sharks compared to the absence of deterrent materials. The other study found that a potentially deterrent material did not reduce bait consumption by bonnethead and young lemon sharks compared to non-deterrents. One of the studies also found that the bait consumption behaviour of commercially valuable Pacific halibut was unaffected by deterrent materials.

OTHER (5 STUDIES)

Reduction of unwanted catch (5 studies): Two of four replicated, controlled studies (one randomized) in the Gulf of Alaska, the Pacific Ocean and the Atlantic Ocean found that fishing gear (longlines and traps) fitted with electropositive deterrent materials caught fewer unwanted spiny dogfish, longnose skate, sharks and rays, and fewer undersized halibut, compared to standard fishing gear or gears with non-deterrent materials. The other two studies, and a global systematic review found that electropositive deterrents on fishing gear resulted in similar catches of unwanted spiny dogfish, sharks (total catch), blue shark and sharks and rays (total catch), compared to gear with no deterrents.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
