3330: Use fences or barriers to protect freshwater wetlands planted with trees/shrubs
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Plants introduced to wetlands may be vulnerable to physical damage from grazing, wind, waves or sediment. Barriers could be used to protect planted vegetation from such physical damage. Here, “barriers” is used quite broadly and includes sleeves, tree guards, fences and fine-meshed silt screens placed around planted vegetation, sticky oils or resins painted onto planted vegetation, and offshore walls or breakwaters. Some of these barriers may have incidental effects on temperature, humidity and sunlight intensity (but covers and screens whose main aim is to modify these factors are considered elsewhere). If the general area containing planted vegetation is fenced, rather than individual planted plants, other colonizing vegetation may benefit too.
Related actions: Use barriers to keep livestock off ungrazed swamps; Exclude or remove livestock from historically grazed swamps; Exclude wild vertebrates using physical barriers; Exclude wild invertebrates using physical barriers; Add surface mulch to complement planting; Add cover other than mulch to complement planting.

Key Messages:

Five studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of using fences or barriers to protect freshwater wetlands planted with trees/shrubs. Four studies were in the USA and one was in Australia.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Tree/shrub abundance (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in a floodplain swamp clearing in the USA found that amongst plots sown with tree seeds, fencing to exclude deer had no significant effect on total tree seedling density after three years.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (2 studies): One replicated, paired, controlled study in a floodplain swamp clearing in the USA found that amongst plots sown with tree seeds, those also fenced to exclude deer contained taller tree seedlings, after three years, than those left unfenced. One replicated, paired, controlled study in created freshwater wetlands in the USA found that the average height of white cedar Thuja occidentalis saplings typically increased by a similar amount, between two and five years after planting, in plots fenced to exclude deer and plots left unfenced.

OTHER

Survival (3 studies): One replicated, paired, controlled study in floodplain swamps in Australia reported that planted swamp gum Eucalyptus camphora seedlings had a much higher survival rate, over one year, in plots fenced to exclude mammals than in open plots. Two replicated, paired, controlled studies in freshwater wetlands in the USA reported that exclusion fencing sometimes increased survival of planted tree seedlings but sometimes had no clear or significant effect. This depended on factors such as the season of planting, seedling elevation, and site.
Growth (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in a nutria-invaded wetland in the USA found that planted baldcypress Taxodium distichum seedlings grew more, over one growing season, when protected than when left unprotected. Plastic guards increased height and diameter growth rates. Sticky, insect-repellent oil increased the growth rate for height, but not diameter.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
