2959: Cut/remove/thin forest plantations: brackish/salt marshes
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
This action includes clear cutting (felling and removing all trees) and thinning (removal of only some trees) to address the threat from forest plantations (i.e. areas where trees have been deliberately planted, usually after drainage). Large wetland areas have been drained and afforested in the Paraná River Delta, South America (Ceballos et al. 2013) and the Sanjiang Plain, China (Zhang et al. 2014). Removing trees may increase light intensity at the ground surface allowing herbaceous plants to grow (Aschehoug et al. 2015), and may allow the water table to rise somewhat, since water is no longer intercepted or taken up by the trees).
Related actions: Raise water level to restore degraded brackish/salt marshes; Raise water level to restore/create brackish/salt marshes from other land uses; Cut large trees/shrubs to maintain or restore disturbance; Use cutting to control problematic large trees/shrubs.
Aschehoug E.T., Sivakoff F.S., Cayton H.L., Morris W.F. & Haddad N.M. (2015) Habitat restoration affects immature stages of a wetland butterfly through indirect effects on predation. Ecology, 96, 1761–1767.
Ceballos D.S., Frangi J. & Jobbágy E.G. (2013) Soil volume and carbon storage shifts in drained and afforested wetlands of the Paraná River Delta. Biogeochemistry, 112, 359‒372.
Zhang B., Chang L., Ni Z., Callaham M.A., Sun X. & Wu D. (2014) Effects of land use changes on winter-active Collembola in Sanjiang Plain of China. Applied Soil Ecology, 83, 51‒58.

Key Messages:
We found no studies that evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of cutting/removing/thinning forest plantations to restore brackish/salt marshes.
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
