2214: Restrict the use of tributyltin or other toxic antifouling coatings
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Antifouling paints and coatings are commonly used to manage biofouling (organisms that can attach to hard surfaces) on vessels and other hard anthropogenic structures. However, some antifouling paints and coatings are highly harmful and toxic to marine organisms (Roach & Wilson 2009). Trybutyltin (TBT) for instance was widely used on vessels but found to be very harmful to marine invertebrates, such as the dog whelk Nucella lapillus whose females developed male genitals (Alzieu 2000; Gibbs et al. 2009), and a ban on the use of this substance was then instated. Restricting the use of tributyltin or other toxic antifouling coatings can reduce or entirely remove the source of toxicity over time from the seawater, therefore reducing the risk of harm to subtidal benthic invertebrates and allowing populations to recover (Bryan et al. 1993). Related evidence for the use of antifouling coatings are summarised under “Threat: Pollution – Use non-toxic antifouling coatings on surfaces”.
 
Alzieu C. (2000) Impact of tributyltin on marine invertebrates. Ecotoxicology, 9, 71–76.
Bryan G.W., Burt G.R., Gibbs P.E. & Pascoe P.L. (1993) Nassarius reticulatus (Nassariidae: Gastropoda) as an indicator of tributyltin pollution before and after TBT restrictions. Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, 73, 913–929.
Gibbs P.E., Bryan G.W., Pascoe P.L. & Burt G.R. (2009) The use of the dog-whelk, Nucella lapillus, as an indicator of tributyltin (TBT) contamination. Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, 67, 507. 
Roach A.C. & Wilson S.P. (2009). Ecological impacts of tributyltin on estuarine communities in the Hastings River, NSW Australia. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 58, 1780–1786.

Key Messages:

Four studies examined the effects of restricting the use of tributyltin as an antifouling coating on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations. One study was located in the English Channel (UK), two in the River Crouch estuary (UK), and one in Otsuchi Bay (Japan).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Overall community composition (1 study): One replicated, before-and-after study in the River Crouch estuary found that after restricting the use of tributyltin, invertebrate community composition changed, but that changes varied with locations.
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, before-and-after study in the River Crouch estuary found that after restricting the use of tributyltin, overall invertebrate species richness and diversity increased.

POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Molluscs condition (1 study): One replicated, before-and-after study in the English Channel found that after restricting the use of tributyltin, there was a decrease in its concentration in dogwhelks and the penis length of female dogwhelks.
Crustacean condition (1 study): One study in Otsuchi Bay found that after restricting the use of tributyltin its concentration decreased in skeleton shrimps.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
