2247: Restore biogenic habitats (other methods) - Restore mussel beds
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Marine biogenic habitats are habitats created by the occurrence of a suite of specific marine species that form a new complex environment for other species to live in and can locally promote subtidal benthic invertebrate biodiversity. Such habitats include coral reefs, oyster reefs, mussel beds, and kelp forests (Jones et al. 1994). Restoring these habitats where they have been either degraded or lost can be achieved by transplanting or translocating new individuals of the biogenic species (evidence summarised under “Habitat restoration and creation – “Transplant captive-bred or hatchery-reared habitat-forming (biogenic) species” and “Translocate habitat-forming (biogenic) species”; Fariñas-Franco & Roberts 2014; Yap 2009) or using other restoration methods that promote the natural recovery of the habitat. For instance, restoring seagrass beds by fertilizing the seabed and adding natural sediment to promote natural seagrass recovery can help the invertebrate community associated with seagrass beds to recover naturally over time (Bourque & Fourqurean 2014).
 
Bourque A.S. & Fourqurean J.W. (2014) Effects of common seagrass restoration methods on ecosystem structure in subtropical seagrass meadows. Marine Environmental Research, 97, 67–78.
Jones C.G., Lawton J.H. & Shachak M. (1994) Organisms as ecosystem engineers. Pages 130–147 in: Ecosystem Management. Springer, New York, NY. 
Fariñas-Franco J.M. & Roberts D. (2014) Early faunal successional patterns in artificial reefs used for restoration of impacted biogenic habitats. Hydrobiologia, 727,75–94. 
Yap H.T. (2009) Local changes in community diversity after coral transplantation. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 374, 33–41.

Key Messages:

Two studies examined the effects of restoring mussel beds (not by transplanting or translocating mussels) on mussels and mussel bed-associated subtidal benthic invertebrates. Both were in Strangford Lough (UK).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Overall community composition (2 studies): One replicated, controlled study in Strangford Lough found that after restoring beds of horse mussels by adding scallop shells to the seabed, overall invertebrate community composition in restored plots was different to that of unrestored plots. One replicated, controlled study in the same area found that after restoring beds of horse mussels by adding scallop shells to the seabed and translocating horse mussels, overall invertebrate community composition in plots restored with shells and mussels was different to plots restored without mussels (shells only), and both were different to unrestored plots and to nearby natural horse mussel beds.
Overall species richness/diversity (2 studies): One replicated, controlled study in Strangford Lough found that after restoring beds of horse mussels by adding scallop shells to the seabed, overall invertebrate species diversity was lower in restored plots compared to unrestored plots, but species richness was similar. One replicated, controlled study in the same area found that after restoring beds of horse mussels by adding scallop shells to the seabed and translocating horse mussels, species richness and diversity were higher in restored plots with mussels and shells compared to plots with shells only, and similar to nearby natural horse mussel beds.

POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Strangford Lough found that after restoring beds of horse mussels by adding scallop shells to the seabed, overall invertebrate abundance was higher in restored plots compared to unrestored plots.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
