854: Translocate amphibians
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Animals are translocated either to reintroduce species to sites that were occupied in the past, introduce species to new sites or to increase population numbers where the species is already present. The strategy can help to rescue populations from threats such as development, maintain or restore a species’ historical range or increase the total number of viable populations, to safeguard against loss of other populations. When translocating animals, consideration should be given to within-species diversity and local adaption, particularly when mixing populations in order to ensure that diversity and adaptive potential is not lost (Ficetola & De Bernardi 2005).
The majority of studies translocated amphibians to sites that had been occupied in the past but had no current population or to new sites. A smaller number of studies translocated animals to sites with an existing population.
See also: 'Translocate frogs', 'Translocate wood frogs', 'Translocate toads', 'Translocate natterjack toads', 'Translocate salamanders (including newts)' and 'Translocate great crested newts'.
Ficetola G.F. & De Bernardi F. (2005) Supplementation or in situ conservation? Evidence of local adaptation in the Italian agile frog Rana latastei and consequences for the management of populations. Animal Conservation, 8, 33–40.
 

Key Messages:

Overall, three global reviews and one replicated, before-and-after study in the USA found that 35 of 54 (65%) amphibian translocations that could be assessed resulted in established breeding populations or substantial recruitment to the adult population. A further two translocations resulted in breeding and one in survival following release.
One review found that translocations of over 1,000 animals were more successful, but that success was not related to the source of animals (wild or captive), life-stage, continent or reason for translocation.

 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Amphibian Conservation
Description: Amphibian Synopsis
