1828: Cover peatland with organic mulch (after planting)
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Introduced peatland vegetation may be killed by hot, dry conditions on bare peat surfaces (e.g. Sagot & Rochefort 1996). Organic mulches (e.g. straw, grass cuttings, heather brash or shrub roots) can be placed on the peatland surface after plants have been introduced to stabilize temperatures and humidity, and offer some shading. This creates a more hospitable environment for establishment and growth of introduced vegetation (Price et al. 1998). Typically, mulch is applied sparsely enough that some light can still reach the peat surface. Caution: Mulches may contain seeds of undesirable plants. It may be necessary to sterilize the material before use.
Key peatland types where this action may be appropriate: bogs, fens/fen meadows, tropical peat swamps.
Related actions: add mulch to peatlands without introducing vegetation; add other covers such as mats, sheets or screens after planting.
Price J., Rochefort L. & Quinty F. (1998) Energy and moisture considerations on cutover peatlands: surface microtopography, mulch cover and Sphagnum regeneration. Ecological Engineering, 10, 293–312.
Sagot C. & Rochefort L. (1996) Tolérance des sphaignes à la dessiccation (Tolerance of Sphagnum mosses to desiccation; in French). Cryptogamie, Bryology-Lichénologie, 17, 171–183.

Key Messages:

Twelve studies evaluated the effects, on peatland vegetation, of adding organic mulch after planting peatland plants. Nine studies were in bogs (one being restored as a fen). Two studies were in fens. One was in a tropical peat swamp.
Germination (1 study): One replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in a bog in Germany found that mulching after sowing seeds increased germination rates for two species (a grass and a shrub), but had no effect on three other herb species.
Survival (3 studies): Two replicated, paired, controlled studies in a fen in Sweden and a bog in the USA reported that mulching increased survival of planted vegetation (mosses or sedges). One replicated, paired, controlled study in Indonesia reported that mulching with oil palm fruits reduced survival of planted peat swamp tree seedlings.
Growth (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in a fen in the USA reported that mulching increased growth of transplanted sedges.
Cover (9 studies): Six studies (including four replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after) in bogs in Canada and the USA and a fen in Sweden found that mulching after planting increased vegetation cover (specifically total vegetation, total mosses/bryophytes, Sphagnum mosses or vascular plants after 1–3 growing seasons). Three replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after studies in degraded bogs in Canada found that mulching after planting had no effect on vegetation cover (Sphagnum mosses or fen-characteristic plants).


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
