2463: Release translocated/captive-bred mammals in family/social groups
Effectiveness rating: Beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Mammals are sometimes wild-caught and translocated or bred in captivity and released to re-establish populations that have been lost, or to augment an existing population. This action includes studies describing or comparing the effects of translocating or releasing mammals in family or social groups. This includes releasing known family or social groups and releasing captive-bred social animals in groups. It also includes releasing groups of animals or coalitions, including pairs that were captured or housed and then released together with the intention of forming a social group/pair, even if the animals did not know each other prior to capture.
See also: Release translocated/captive-bred mammals in larger unrelated groups.

Key Messages:

Twenty-six studies evaluated the effects of releasing translocated or captive-bred mammals in family or social groups. Eleven were in the USA, seven were in South Africa and one was in each of Poland, Zimbabwe, along the USA–Canada border, Russia, Italy, Canada, China and India.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (22 STUDIES)

Abundance (4 studies): A study in the USA found that a translocated population of Rocky Mountain bighorn sheep released in groups increased at a similar rate to that of a population newly established through natural recolonization. A replicated, controlled study in the USA found that after translocating black-tailed prairie dogs in social groups to areas with artificial burrows, colonies increased in size over four years. A replicated study in Canada found that following translocation of elk, most of which had been kept in holding pens in groups, numbers increased at two of four sites. A study in the USA found that following the release of captive-reared bighorn sheep in groups, the overall population declined over 14 years.
Reproductive success (11 studies): A study in the USA found that captive-reared bighorn sheep released in groups had similar population recruitment rates compared to wild-reared sheep. A replicated, paired study in the USA found that black-tailed prairie dogs translocated as family groups had higher reproductive success than those translocated in non-family groups. A replicated study in the USA found that translocated gray wolves had similar breeding success when adult family groups were released together from holding pens or when young adults were released directly into the wild. Six of eight studies (one replicated) in Poland, Russia, South Africa, the USA and the USA–Canada border found that when translocated and/or captive-bred animals were released in social or family groups, cheetahs, European bison, lions, African wild dogs, most European beavers and some swift foxes reproduced successfully. One study found that one of two translocated Cape buffalo groups released after being held in a holding pen formed a single herd and reproduced, while the other scattered and escaped the reserve. One study found that no Gunnison's prairie dogs reproduced during the first year.
Survival (19 studies): One of three studies (one controlled, before-and-after) in the USA found that when translocated or captive-bred animals were released in family or social groups, captive-reared bighorn sheep had similar survival compared to wild-reared sheep, whereas two found lower survival compared to wild white-tailed deer and San Joaquin kit foxes. Three replicated studies (one controlled, one paired) in the USA found that when translocated as a social or family group, black‐tailed prairie dogs had higher and white-tailed deer and gray wolves had similar survival rates to those translocated as unrelated groups or individuals. Ten studies (one replicated) in Poland, Russia, Italy, South Africa, the USA, USA–Canada border, China and India found that when translocated and/or captive-bred animals were released in social or family groups, a population of Przewalski’s horses and European bison persisted 5-11 years, lions, most swift foxes and European beavers and half or more cheetahs survived for at least one year, and one-horned rhinoceroses and over half of Gunnison's prairie dogs and Eurasian badgers survived at least 1-6 months. Three studies in the USA and South Africa found that when translocated or captive-bred animals were released in family or social groups (some provided with artificial refuges and/or supplementary food), most Mexican wolves did not survive over eight months and all rock hyraxes died within 90 days. A study in South Africa found that translocated and captive-bred African wild dogs released in family groups into fenced reserves had high survival rates.
Condition (1 study): A study in China found that following the release of captive-bred Przewalski’s horses in groups, the population had a lower genetic diversity than two captive populations.

BEHAVIOUR (4 STUDIES)

Behaviour change (4 studies): Two replicated, controlled (one before-and-after) studies in the USA found that when translocated as a social or family group, white-tailed deer had similar average dispersal distances and Utah prairie dogs had similar release site fidelity and post-release behaviour compared to those translocated as unrelated groups. One found that deer translocated together did not stay together, whether they had previously been part of the same social group or not. A study in Zimbabwe found that a translocated lion family joined with immigrant lions and formed a new pride. A study in South Africa found that translocated lions that were released in groups that had already been socialised and formed into prides, established stable home ranges.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
