3797: Relocate nests/eggs for artificial incubation: Snakes
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Relocating eggs to artificially incubate them may be used as a way to maximise hatching success as the eggs will no longer be vulnerable to natural threats such as predation. Consideration must be given to the potential impacts of incubation conditions (for example temperature and humidity) on the sex, size, shape, colour, behaviour, movement ability and post-hatching growth of reptile hatchlings (Warner & Andrews 2002, Booth et al. 2006).
This action includes studies where eggs are incubated in artificial conditions, which ranges from controlled laboratory settings to using polystyrene boxes to incubate eggs in buildings. Studies are also included where gravid females are brought into captivity to lay eggs, but eggs are taken away from the females for artificial incubation.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians. See here for: Sea turtles; Tortoises, terrapins, side-necked & softshell turtles; Lizards; Crocodilians or Tuatara.
For studies that discuss the effects of relocating and re-burying eggs in natural habitats to avoid threats, see Relocate nests/eggs to a hatchery and Relocate nests/eggs to nearby natural setting (not including hatcheries).
See also Maintain wild-caught, gravid females in captivity during gestation and Alter incubation temperatures to achieve optimal/desired sex ratio.
Booth D.T. (2006) Influence of incubation temperature on hatchling phenotype in reptiles. Physiological and Biochemical Zoology, 79, 274–281.
Warner D.A. & Andrews R.M. (2002) Laboratory and field experiments identify sources of variation in phenotypes and survival of hatchling lizards. Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 76, 105–124.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects of relocating nests/eggs for artificial incubation on snake populations. Two studies were in Australia and one was in each of Japan and China.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (4 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (4 studies): Two studies in Australia reported that 87% of carpet python eggs and 83% of brown tree snake eggs hatched successfully following artificial incubation. One study also reported that zero of 10 artificially incubated Oenpelli python eggs hatched. One study in Japan reported that 265 habu eggs hatched successfully following artificial incubation. One replicated, randomized study in China found that hatching success of artificially incubated stripe-tailed ratsnake eggs was lowest at the coolest and warmest temperatures tested.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (1 STUDY)

Offspring sex ratio (1 study): One study in Japan reported that artificially incubated habu eggs produced offspring with an even sex ratio.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
