696: Maintain traditional water meadows (includes management for breeding and/or wintering waders/waterfowl)
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This intervention may involve using management such as mowing or grazing to maintain plant communities and wildlife typically associated with traditional water meadows. Water meadows are areas of grazing land or hay meadow that have carefully controlled water levels to keep the soil damp. In Europe they provide valuable breeding habitats for wading birds and other biodiversity.
In the Netherlands, the ‘meadow bird agreements’ agri-environment scheme is designed to protect birds associated with wet meadows (Kleijn & van Zuijlen 2004). Fields managed under ‘meadow bird agreements’ must not have any agricultural activities from 1 April to June-July, pesticide use is prohibited as is cultivation and re-seeding, the areas must be mown or grazed at least once a year and water levels must be maintained (Kleijn & van Zuijlen 2004).
See also ‘Restore or create traditional water meadows’ for studies that look at the effects of creating or restoring water meadows.

Key Messages:

Four studies from Belgium, Germany, the Netherlands and the UK (including two site comparisons of which one also replicated) found that maintaining traditional water meadows resulted in an increased population size or number of territories of northern lapwing, common redshank and black-tailed godwit and increased plant species richness. However one of these studies also found common snipe declined on all sites under management to maintain traditional water meadows, and another of the studies found that differences in numbers of birds were present before meadow bird management.
Two studies (a replicated study and a review of European studies) found that managing traditional water meadows by grazing had mixed impacts on wildlife and that the productivity of northern lapwings was too low to sustain populations on three of the four water meadows managed for waders. A randomized, replicated, controlled trial in the Netherlands found that cutting in June maintained relatively stable vegetation and a review found mowing could be used to maintain water meadows but had variable effects on plant species richness.
One replicated site comparison from the Netherlands found more birds bred on 12.5 ha plots with management for wading birds (in combination with per-clutch payments), however at the field scale there was no difference in bird abundance or species richness between conventionally managed fields and those managed for birds.

 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Farmland Conservation
Description: Farmland Synopsis
