3770: Release captive-bred reptiles into the wild: Tortoises, terrapins, side-necked & softshell turtles
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Captive breeding is normally used to provide individuals that can then be released into the wild (often called ‘reintroduction’) to either re-establish a population that has been lost, or to augment an existing population (‘restocking’).
Release techniques vary considerably, from ‘hard releases’ involving the simple release of individuals into the wild to ‘soft releases’ which involve a variety of adaptation and acclimatisation techniques before release, or post-release feeding and care.
This action includes studies describing the effects of release programmes for captive-bred reptiles that do not specifically test the effectiveness of specific release techniques. For studies that compare specific release techniques see Use holding pens or enclosures at release site prior to release of captive-bred reptiles; Use holding pens or enclosures at release site prior to release of wild reptiles and Release reptiles into burrows.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians. See here for: Sea turtles; Snakes & lizards; Crocodilians or Tuatara.

Key Messages:

Fourteen studies evaluated the effects of releasing captive-bred tortoises terrapins, side-necked & softshell turtles into the wild. Five studies were in the USA, three were in Italy, two were in the Seychelles, and one was in each of Madagascar, Australia and Spain and Minorca and one was global.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (13 STUDIES)

Abundance (1 study): One global review found that when using recruitment to the adult population as a measure of success, 32% of reptile translocations/releases (releases of captive individuals were 7% of total projects) were successful.
Occupancy/range (1 study): One review in Australia found that two of three releases of captive-bred Western swamp tortoises were classified as successful.
Reproductive success (2 studies): Two studies (including one replicated study) in Italy reported evidence of a gravid female and successful reproduction following release of captive-bred European pond turtles.
Survival (11 studies): Six of nine studies (including two replicated, controlled studies) in Madagascar, the Seychelles, the USA and Italy reported that 66–100% of 5–80 captive-bred tortoises and turtles released into the wild survived over monitoring periods of six months to two years. Two studies reported that 16–20% of 5 and 246 individuals survived over two years. The other study reported that some of over 250 individuals (number not given) were recaptured over a year of monitoring. One study also found captive-bred alligator snapping turtles that were older at their time of release had higher survival than younger turtles. One replicated study in Italy found that annual survival of released captive-bred European pond turtles was 67–91%. One replicated study in Spain and Minorca found that survival of captive-bred Hermann’s tortoises was higher after three years after release into the wild compared to 1–2 years after release. The study also found that after three years, survival of released tortoises was similar to that of wild tortoises in one population, but lower in a second population.
Condition (2 studies): One of two controlled studies (including one replicated study) in the USA found that released captive-bred juvenile alligator snapping turtles grew at a similar rate and achieved higher body condition than juveniles that remained in captivity. The other study found that released alligator snapping turtles had similar body conditions compared to individuals that remained in captivity.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Behaviour change (1 study): One randomized study in the USA found that captive-bred Blanding’s turtles released into open water habitat had larger home ranges than those released into places dominated by cattail or willows.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
