2668: Cease or prohibit shellfish dredging
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Dredging is done to harvest edible shellfish species (e.g. mussels, clams, scallops, crabs) and is undertaken globally and involves towing a dredge along the seabed. Towed shellfish dredges are usually constructed from a heavy metal frame covered with chain mesh and they vary in size and design depending on the target species. Because of their heavy construction and deployment on the seabed, dredges can cause considerable disturbance, reducing water quality and damaging the seabed, and this has been blamed for decreases in catches of fish (Hoffmann & Dolmer, 2000). They may also capture or damage small unwanted fish. Inside areas where dredging is prohibited, its indirect (disturbance) and direct (fishing mortality) effects on fish are removed, although fishing using other methods may still impact the fish species and populations.
For a related intervention, see ‘Cease or prohibit mobile fishing gears that catch bottom (demersal) species and are dragged across the seafloor’.
Hoffmann E. & Dolmer P. (2000) Effect of closed areas on distribution of fish and epibenthos. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 57, 1310–1314.

Key Messages:

One study examined the effects of ceasing or prohibiting shellfish dredging on marine fish populations. The study was in the North Sea (Denmark).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Richness/diversity (1 study): One before-and-after, site comparison study in the North Sea reported that 10 years after mussel dredging ceased in an area closed to all towed fishing gears there was no change in species richness of bottom-dwelling fish compared to before and to open areas.

POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Abundance (1 study): One before-and-after, site comparison study in the North Sea, reported that ceasing mussel dredging in an area closed to all towed gears had no effect on the abundance of bottom-dwelling fish after 10 years, and compared to open areas.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
