1772: Use cutting to control problematic large trees/shrubs
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
This section considers cutting and the removal of above-ground parts of mature shrubs and trees: plants that are too large to mow. Roots are left in place. Cuttings may be removed from the site (which means the nutrients they contain are also removed), or left in place to rot down.
Caution: Tree/shrub removal may be desirable on a subset of peatlands e.g. open bogs, fens and fen meadows. Tree thinning may be desirable on some naturally forested peatlands - but tree removal is more typically a threat here.
Related actions: cutting and removing trees that have grown as part of forestry operations; cutting to control trees/shrubs as part of a traditional disturbance regime; completely removing problematic plants by digging/pulling.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects on peatland vegetation of cutting and removing problematic large trees/shrubs. Both studies were in fens. N.B. Cutting trees/shrubs in historically disturbed peatlands is considered as a separate action.
Plant community composition (2 studies): Two studies (one replicated, controlled, before-and-after) in fens in the USA and Sweden reported that the plant community composition changed following tree/shrub removal, becoming less like unmanaged fens or more like undegraded, open fen.
Characteristic plants (1 study): One study in a fen in Sweden found that species richness and cover of fen-characteristic plants increased following tree/shrub removal.
Vegetation cover (2 studies): One study in a fen in Sweden found that moss and vascular plant cover increased following tree/shrub removal. One replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in fens in the USA found that shrub removal (along with other interventions) could not prevent increases in shrub cover over time.
Overall plant richness/diversity (2 studies): One study in a fen in Sweden found that moss and vascular plant species richness increased following tree/shrub removal. However, one replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in fens in the USA found that shrub removal (along with other interventions) prevented increases in total plant species richness.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
