3380: Treat seeds of non-woody plants with chemicals before sowing: freshwater wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Acids and bleach may weaken the seed coat, increasing its permeability to water and gases which are essential breaking dormancy and inducing germination (Baskin & Baskin 2014). They may also sterilize seeds, killing fungi that may otherwise reduce germination rates. Hormones are widely used in agriculture and horticulture to stimulate germination and growth (Small & Degenhardt 2018). Other molecules such as nitrates act as signals within plants and may stimulate germination (Alboresi et al. 2005).
To be summarized as evidence for this action, studies must have explicitly compared the performance of treated and untreated seeds. Studies that simply report the performance of treated seeds are not summarized here. Studies do not have to be in flooded/saturated soils, as long as they involve wetland-characteristic species.
Related actions: Soak seeds before sowing; Chill seeds before sowing; Heat seeds before sowing; Expose seeds to light before sowing; Physically damage seeds before sowing.
Alboresi A., Gestin C., Leydecker M.T., Bedu M., Meyer C. & Truong, H.N. (2005) Nitrate, a signal relieving seed dormancy in Arabidopsis. Plant, Cell & Environment, 28, 500–512.
Baskin C.C. & Baskin J.M. (2014) Seeds: Ecology, Biogeography and Evolution of Dormancy and Germination, Second Edition. Academic Press.
Small C.C. & Degenhardt D. (2018) Plant growth regulators for enhancing revegetation success in reclamation: a review. Ecological Engineering, 118, 43–51.

Key Messages:

Six studies evaluated the effects – on emergent, non-woody plants typical of freshwater wetlands – of treating their seeds with chemicals before sowing. All six studies were in greenhouses or laboratories in the USA.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE
 
VEGETATION STRUCTURE
 
OTHER

Germination/emergence (6 studies): Of six replicated, controlled studies in greenhouses or laboratories in the USA, five identified chemicals that sometimes increased, and did not significantly reduce, the germination rate of herb seeds: potassium nitrate, nitric acid and bleach. The effect of these chemicals depended on factors such as the age of the seeds, the species and other pre-sowing treatments. Two of the studies identified chemicals that never had a significant effect on the germination rate of herb seeds: a plant hormone and sulfuric acid.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
