3239: Add inorganic fertilizer: freshwater marshes
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Fertilizers can be used to manage nutrient availability and may speed up revegetation. Plant growth might be limited by a lack of nutrients overall, or of a specific nutrient, after drainage, mining, vegetation harvest or pollution. When one or two nutrients are overabundant, invasive plant species may benefit more than native species. Adding the less abundant nutrients may shift the competitive balance back towards native species (Tilman et al. 1999; Perry et al. 2004). Commonly added nutrients include nitrogen (N), phosphorous (P) and/or potassium (K). It may be sensible to add fertilizer when the focal site is not flooded, to reduce the risk of it dissolving or being washed away.
The effects of this action will be heavily dependent on the study context, especially initial site nutrient levels and the amount of fertilizer added. Adding fertilizer when nutrients are already abundant could cause more harm than good, encouraging the growth of undesirable plants or algae and even inhibiting plant growth (Weinbaum et al. 1992). Accordingly, studies testing the effects of nutrient enrichment as a threat (i.e. enrichment above normal or desirable levels) are not summarized as evidence.
Related actions: Add inorganic fertilizer to complement planting; Stimulate microbial breakdown of oil, including through fertilization.
Perry L.G., Galatowitsch S.M. & Rosen C.J. (2004) Competitive control of invasive vegetation: a native wetland sedge suppresses Phalaris arundinacea in carbon-enriched soil. Journal of Applied Ecology, 41, 151–162.
Tilman E.A., Tilman D., Crawley M.J. & Johnston A.E. (1999) Biological weed control via nutrient competition: potassium limitation of dandelions. Ecological Applications, 9, 103–111.
Weinbaum S.A., Johnson R.S. & DeJong T.M. (1992) Causes and consequences of overfertilization in orchards. HortTechnology, 2, 112–121.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of adding inorganic fertilizer to restore or create freshwater marshes. The study was in Germany.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in wet grasslands in Germany reported that the effect of annual fertilization (for 20 years) on the average moisture preference of the vegetation varied between sites.
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): The same study reported that the effect of annual fertilization (for 20 years) on total plant species richness varied between sites.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in wet grasslands in Germany reported that plots fertilized every spring contained more vegetation biomass, after 4–18 years, than unfertilized plots.
Herb abundance (1 study): The same study reported that the effect of annual fertilization (for 20 years) on cover of herb groups (sedges, rushes, forbs, ferns, grasses and legumes) varied between sites.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in wet grasslands in Germany reported that the effect of annual fertilization (for 20 years) on vegetation height varied between sites.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
