831: Raise awareness amongst the general public through campaigns and public information
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Raising awareness about amphibians, the threats that they face and about their conservation can help to change public perceptions and therefore have an indirect effect on the conservation of amphibians.
This intervention involves general information and awareness campaigns in response to a range of threats. Studies describing educational and data collection programmes are described in ‘Provide education programmes about amphibians’ and ‘Engage volunteers to collect amphibian data’.
There are a number of studies that describe projects that involve raising awareness in which measures of success such as uptake or impacts on amphibian populations have not been monitored (e.g. Zippel et al. 2002; Griffiths et al. 2004). Examples of global campaigns are the ‘Year of the Frog’ in 2008 and the ‘Search for Lost Frogs’. The ‘Year of the Frog’ was led by Amphibian Ark and raised awareness among governments, media, educators and the general public, and raised funds for amphibian conservation programmes (Pavajeau et al. 2008). The ‘Search for Lost Frogs’ campaign was launched in 2010 and supported expeditions to 21 countries across five continents to search for species not seen for a decade or more.
Griffiths R.A., Graue V., Bride I.G. & McKay J.E. (2004) Conservation of the axolotl (Ambystoma mexicanum) at Lake Xochimilco,  Mexico. Herpetological Bulletin, 89, 4–11.
Pavajeau L., Zippel K.C., Gibson R. & Johnson K. (2008) Amphibian Ark and the 2008 Year of the Frog campaign. International Zoo Yearbook, 42, 24–29.
Zippel K.C. (2002) Conserving the Panamanian Golden Frog: Proyecto Rana Dorada. Herpetological Review, 33, 11–12.
 

Key Messages:

Two studies (including one replicated, before-and-after study) in Estonia and the UK found that raising public awareness, along with other interventions, increased numbers of natterjack toads and created 1,023 ponds for amphibians.
One before-and-after study in Mexico found that raising awareness in tourists, increased their knowledge of axolotls. One study in Taiwan found that holding press conferences to publicize frog conservation had no effect on a green tree frog project. 
Two studies in Panama and the UK found that awareness campaigns reached over 50,000 members of the public each year or trained 1,016 people at 57 events over four years.

 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Amphibian Conservation
Description: Amphibian Synopsis
