1825: Add lime (before/after planting)
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be ineffective or harmful
Background information and definitions:
Peatland plant survival and growth is partly determined by the acidity of a peatland, or pH (Rydin & Jeglum 2013). Fen plants grow in alkaline to weakly acidic peat (approximately pH 6–8, similar to saliva, tap water or sea water). Bog plants grow in more acidic peat (approximately pH 4–5, similar to tomato juice or coffee). The acidity of a peatland also determines the availability of nutrients. For example, phosphorous becomes locked away in acidic soils (Weil & Brady 2016).
Lime (calcium and/or magnesium-rich chemicals) can be added to peatlands to reduce acidity and modify nutrient availability, potentially increasing survival or growth of peatland vegetation. To be included as evidence in this section, studies must have reported the response of peatland vegetation, not just nurse plants (e.g. Caporn et al. 2007).
Caution: The benefits and harms of liming are very context specific. Liming is mostly used in fens and fen meadows, but is sometimes used in extremely polluted, exceptionally acidic bogs. Lime could damage most bogs by reducing natural acidity.
Related actions: add lime to peatlands without introducing vegetation; restoration using multiple interventions, sometimes including liming.
Caporn S., Sen R., Field C., Jones E., Carroll J. & Dise N. (2007) Consequences of lime and fertilizer application for moorland restoration and carbon balance. Moors for the Future Research Report.
Rydin H. & Jeglum J.K. (2013) The Biology of Peatlands, Second Edition. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Weil R.R. & Brady N.C. (2016) The Nature and Properties of Soils, Fifteenth Edition. Pearson, USA.

Key Messages:

Six studies evaluated the effects on peatland vegetation of liming areas planted with peatland plants. Four studies involved fen plants, one involved bog plants and one involved peat swamp plants. Two of the studies were in greenhouses/nurseries.
Survival (2 studies): One replicated, controlled study in the Netherlands reported that liming typically reduced survival of planted fen herbs after two growing seasons. One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in Sweden found that liming increased survival of planted fen mosses over one growing season.
Growth (3 studies): Two controlled, before-and-after studies found that liming did not increase growth of planted peatland vegetation. Liming reduced or had no effect on Sphagnum moss growth in bog pools in the UK, and reduced growth rates for the majority of peat swamp tree seedlings in a nursery in Indonesia. One replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in Sweden found that liming increased growth of planted fen mosses.
Cover (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in a fen in Sweden found that liming increased cover of sown mosses. However, one replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in a bog in Canada found that liming plots sown with fen vegetation fragments had no effect on total vegetation, vascular plant or bryophyte cover.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
