2144: Modify the position of traps
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Traps or pots are static gears often used to fish for crabs or lobsters. They consist of structures into which species of commercial interest enter through funnels. These funnels encourage entry but limit escape, and often catch a large amount of unwanted catch species (Stevens 1996). The position of traps can be modified, for example by floating traps in the water above the seabed rather than placing them static on the seabed (Furevik et al. 2008), to potentially reduce the amount of certain species of subtidal benthic invertebrate accidentally caught.
Evidence for related interventions is summarised under “Threat: Biological resource use – Modify the design of traps” and “Use different bait species in traps”.
 
Furevik D.M., Humborstad O.B., Jørgensen T. & Løkkeborg S. (2008) Floated fish pot eliminates bycatch of red king crab and maintains target catch of cod. Fisheries Research, 92, 23–27.
Stevens B.G. (1996) Crab bycatch in pot fisheries. Solving bycatch: considerations for today and tomorrow, 151–158.

Key Messages:

Two studies examined the effects of modifying the position of traps on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations. One study was in the Varangerfjord (Norway), the other in the North Atlantic Ocean (Spain).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Unwanted catch species richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the North Atlantic found that semi-floating traps caught fewer unwanted catch species compared to standard bottom traps.

POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Unwanted catch abundance (2 studies): Two replicated, controlled studies in the Varangerfjord and the North Atlantic found that floating or semi-floating traps caught fewer unwanted invertebrates compared to standard bottom traps.

OTHER (2 STUDIES)

Commercial catch abundance (2 studies): Two replicated, controlled studies in the Varangerfjord and the North Atlantic found that floating or semi-floating traps caught similar amounts (abundance and biomass) of commercially targeted species as standard bottom traps.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
