2815: Use acoustic devices on fishing vessels
Effectiveness rating: Trade off between benefit and harms
Background information and definitions:
Acoustic devices (sometimes referred to ‘pingers’) may be deployed on boats to deter marine or freshwater mammals at wild fisheries. This may reduce the risk of mammals becoming entangled or captured in fishing gear. Mammal predation on fish catches may also decrease, which may reduce human-wildlife conflict. However, acoustic devices should be used with caution as the effects can span large distances and mammals may be deterred from important habitats or migration routes (Carlström et al. 2009). The use of multiple acoustic devices in an area may also have cumulative effects (Findlay et al. 2018).
Studies have been summarised below if they tested acoustic devices for the purpose of deterring mammals at wild fisheries and the device was deployed from a vessel (including fishing boats and research vessels). For similar interventions, see Use acoustic devices on fishing gear and Use acoustic devices on moorings.
Carlström J., Berggren P. & Tregenza N.J.C. (2009) Spatial and temporal impact of pingers on porpoises. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 66, 72−82
Findlay C.R., Ripple H.D., Coomber F., Froud K., Harries O., van Geel N.C.F., Calderan S.V., Benjamins S., Risch D. & Wilson B. (2018) Mapping widespread and increasing underwater noise pollution from acoustic deterrent devices. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 135, 1042–1050.

Key Messages:

Five studies evaluated the effects on marine mammals of using acoustic devices on vessels. One study was in each of the Shannon Estuary (Ireland), the Rainbow Channel (Australia), Keppel Bay (Australia), the North Atlantic Ocean (Azores) and the Indian Ocean (Crozet Islands).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (4 STUDIES)

Behaviour change (4 studies): One controlled study in the Shannon Estuary found that common bottlenose dolphins avoided a boat more frequently when acoustic devices of two types were deployed alongside it. One controlled study in the Indian Ocean found that killer whales were recorded further from a fishing vessel when an acoustic device was used during hauls, but distances decreased after the first exposure to the device. Two before-and-after studies in the Rainbow Channel and Keppel Bay found that an acoustic device deployed alongside a vessel reduced surfacing and echolocation rates and time spent foraging or socializing of Indo-Pacific humpback dolphins and Australian snubfin dolphins but there was no effect on 8–10 other types of behaviour (e.g. vocalizing, diving, travelling etc.).

OTHER (1 STUDY)

Human-wildlife conflict (1 study): One randomized, controlled study in the North Atlantic Ocean found that using acoustic devices of two types did not reduce predation of squid catches by Risso’s dolphins.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
