2686: Reduce duration of fishing gear deployments
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
The length of time for which fishing gear is deployed, also known as soaking time, can affect the amount of unwanted species caught, catch efficiency, and the condition and survival of released unwanted catch. Shorter gear deployments reduce the amount of time that the gear is in the water and consequently can minimise potential interactions with the wider ecosystem. In longline fisheries, for example, catch rates are initially high after gear deployment, but then decrease (Løkkeborg & Pina 1996), and shorter gear deployments may reduce the amount of unwanted catch. Furthermore, unwanted catch that remains hooked for a shorter amount of time may be more likely to survive after being released. In towed gears such as trawls, shorter gear deployments can reduce the physiological effects of stress and crowding during capture in the gear on unwanted catch, again potentially increasing post-release survival (Heard et al. 2014).
Evidence for similar interventions is summarized under ‘Deployment of fishing gear and mode of operation - Reduce duration of fishing gear deployments’ and ‘Reduce the hauling speed of a trawl net’. See also ‘Handling of Catch’.
Heard M., Van Rijn J.A., Reina R.D. & Huveneers C. (2014) Impacts of crowding, trawl duration and air exposure on the physiology of stingarees (family: Urolophidae). Conservation Physiology, 2, 1–14.
Løkkeborg S. & Pina T. (1997) Effects of setting time, setting direction and soak time on longline catch rates. Fisheries Research, 32, 213–222.

Key Messages:

Four studies examined the effects of reducing the duration of time that fishing gear is deployed in the water on marine fish populations. Two studies were in the North Sea. One study was in the Atlantic Ocean (USA) and one was in both the Barents Sea and Atlantic Ocean (Norway/USA). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES) 

Survival (2 studies): Two replicated, controlled studies in the North Sea found that survival of unwanted plaice and/or sole released after capture in beam or pulse trawls was higher after shorter duration trawl deployments, but that the opposite was true for plaice captured in otter trawls, over tow durations of between one and two hours. 

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (2 STUDIES) 

Reduction of unwanted catch (1 study): One of two replicated studies (one paired and controlled) in the Barents Sea/Atlantic Ocean and the Atlantic Ocean found that catch rates of unwanted sharks caught in longline gear decreased with decreasing time the gear was deployed in the water, over durations of up to 10 hours. The other study found that shorter tow durations caught similar amounts of small haddock, but more small cod, than longer durations, in bottom trawls fished for between five minutes and one hour.
Improved size-selectivity of fishing gear (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in the Barents Sea/Atlantic Ocean found that varying bottom trawl fishing durations between five minutes and two hours had no effect on the size-selectivity of Atlantic cod, haddock or long rough dab.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
