2101: Cease or prohibit dredging
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Fishing can impact subtidal benthic invertebrates through species removal or habitat damage from fishing gear coming into contact with the seabed (Collie et al. 2000). Mobile fishing gear such as towed dredges, for instance used in the harvest of bivalves such as clams and scallops, involves towing a heavy steel frame along the seabed, and are known to be particularly damaging to benthic biota. Ceasing or prohibiting dredges in an area, for instance through bylaws or voluntary agreements (Blyth et al. 2002; Bull 1989; Schejter et al. 2008), can remove this direct pressure to subtidal benthic invertebrates and allow them to potentially recolonise and recover naturally over time (Blyth et al. 2004). Recreational and artisanal bivalve fishing may cause less impact compared to dredging due to the smaller scale of the operations and the harvesting methods used (for instance hand-harvest). Evidence for related interventions is summarised under “Threat: Biological resource use – Cease or prohibit all towed (mobile) fishing gear”. When this intervention occurs within a protected area, evidence has been summarised under “Habitat protection – Designate a Marine Protected Area and prohibit dredging” and “Designate a Marine Protected Area and prohibit the harvest of scallop”.
 
Blyth R.E., Kaiser M.J., Edwards-Jones G. & Hart P.J.B. (2004) Implications of a zoned fishery management system for marine benthic communities. Journal of Applied Ecology, 41, 951-961.
Blyth R.E., Kaiser M. J., Edwards-Jones G. & Hart P.J.B. (2002) Voluntary management in an inshore fishery has conservation benefits. Environmental Conservation, 29, 493–508.
Bull M.F. (1989) The New Zealand scallop fishery: a brief review of the fishery and its management. Edited by: MLC Dredge, WF Zacharin and LM Joli, 42.
Collie J.S., Hall S.J., Kaiser M.J. & Poiner I.R. (2000) A quantitative analysis of fishing impacts on shelf‐sea benthos. Journal of Animal Ecology, 69, 785–798.
Schejter, L., Bremec, C.S. & Hernández, D. (2008) Comparison between disturbed and undisturbed areas of the Patagonian scallop (Zygochlamys patagonica) fishing ground “Reclutas” in the Argentine Sea. Journal of Sea Research, 60, 193–200.

Key Messages:

Four studies examined the effects of ceasing or prohibiting dredging on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations. One study was in the North Atlantic Ocean (Portugal), one in the South Atlantic Ocean (Argentina), one in the English Channel and one in the Irish Sea (UK).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Overall community composition (3 studies): One of three site comparison studies (one replicated, one before-and-after) in Atlantic Ocean and the Irish Sea found that after ceasing dredging, overall invertebrate community composition was different to that in dredged areas. The other two found that communities remained similar in dredged and non-dredged areas.
Overall richness/diversity (3 studies): One of three site comparison studies (one replicated, one before-and-after) in Atlantic Ocean and the Irish Sea found that after ceasing dredging, large (macro-) invertebrate diversity was higher but small (meio-) invertebrate diversity was lower compared to dredged areas. The other two found that overall diversity remained similar in dredged and non-dredged areas.

POPULATION RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Overall abundance (3 studies): One of three site comparison studies (one replicated, one before-and-after) in Atlantic Ocean and the Irish Sea found that four years after ceasing dredging, large (macro-) and small (meio-) invertebrate abundance and/or biomass appeared higher to that in dredged areas. The other two found that abundance and/or biomass remained similar in dredged and non-dredged areas after either two or six years.
Tunicate abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the English Channel found that a year after ceasing dredging in three areas, abundance of ascidians/sea squirts (tunicates) was similar to that in dredged areas.
Bryozoan abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the English Channel found that a year after ceasing dredging in three areas, abundance of bryozoan was higher than in dredged areas.
Crustacean abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the English Channel found that a year after ceasing dredging in three areas, abundance of spider crabs was higher than in dredged areas, but abundance of edible crab was similar.
Cnidarian abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the English Channel found that a year after ceasing dredging in three areas, abundance of sea fans was higher than in dredged areas.
Sponge abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the English Channel found that a year after ceasing dredging in three areas, abundance of sponges was higher than in dredged areas.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
