3324: Introduce nurse plants to aid focal non-woody plants: freshwater wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Nurse plants, also known as companion plants or pioneer plants, can be planted alongside focal plants to help the focal plants establish (Padilla & Pugnaire 2006). Nurse plants may benefit focal plants in variety of ways, including: trapping and stabilizing sediments, trapping propagules, mitigating harsh environmental conditions (e.g. temperature fluctuations and strong sunlight), attracting pollinators, deflecting herbivory away from focal species, and/or limiting weed establishment.
Caution: Nurse plant species must be chosen carefully. Species that spread easily or are very strong competitors can cause more harm than good. For example, the non-native mangrove apple Sonneratia apetala has been used to restore Chinese mangroves, but has spread into neighbouring forests (Ren et al. 2009). Use of non-native nurse plants may not always be ethically acceptable.
To be summarized as evidence for this action, studies must have (a) deliberately introduced nurse plants before planting target marsh or swamp vegetation, and (b) reported the effects of the nurse plants on other vegetation, not just the survival or growth of the nurse plants. Studies must have explicitly planted vegetation for its nursing effect. Studies are not summarized as evidence here if they planted target vegetation into existing nurse vegetation (e.g. Egerova et al. 2003; McKee et al. 2007), or examined spontaneous colonization amongst planted nurse vegetation.
Related actions: Introduce nurse plants without introducing target marsh or swamp vegetation.
Egerova J., Proffitt C.E. & Travis S.E. (2003) Facilitation of survival and growth of Baccharis halimifolia L. by Spartina alterniflora Loisel. in a created Louisiana salt marsh. Wetlands, 23, 250–256.
McKee K.L., Rooth J.E. & Feller I.C. (2007) Mangrove recruitment after forest disturbance is facilitated by herbaceous species in the Caribbean. Ecological Applications, 17, 1678–1693.
Padilla F.M. & Pugnaire F.I. (2006) The role of nurse plants in the restoration of degraded environments. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 4, 196–202.
Ren H., Lu H., Shen W., Huang C., Guo Q., Li Z. & Jian S. (2009) Sonneratia apetala Buch.Ham in the mangrove ecosystems of China: an invasive species or restoration species? Ecological Engineering, 35, 1243–1248.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of introducing nurse plants to freshwater wetlands planted with emergent, non-woody plants. Both studies were on the same site in the USA, but used different experimental set-ups.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Characteristic plant abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in an experimental wet basin in the USA found that sowing potential nurse plants alongside target sedge meadow species reduced the density of the target species overall, and of target grass-like species. Nurse plant addition sometimes affected the abundance of target forbs, depending on the presence of an invasive species and addition of sawdust to plots.
Individual species abundance (2 studies): Two replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after studies in wet basins in the USA quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. One study reported that sowing potential nurse plants typically had no significant effect on – and sometimes reduced – the biomass of sown porcupine sedge Carex hystericina, after 1–2 growing seasons. The other study reported varying effects of potential nurse plants on the abundance of individual target plant species, depending on factors such as diversity of the nurse crop and addition of sawdust to plots.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE
 
OTHER

Germination/emergence (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in an experimental wet basin in the USA found that the presence of a high-diversity nurse crop reduced the germination rate of sown sedge meadow species. A low-diversity nurse crop had no significant effect on their germination rate.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
