723: Alter the timing of insecticide use
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
This involves applying insecticides at different dates in the growing season or at different times during the cropping cycle. Sprays can be reduced or avoided during periods of natural enemy vulnerability to reduce impacts on the ecosystem service they provide, although many studies test different dates simply to time spraying with periods of likely pest abundance or crop damage. Some of the evidence relates to chemicals now widely removed from use, and readers should bear in mind that using more selective insecticides may also allow greater flexibility in the timing of applications (‘Use more selective pesticides’ will be included in future synopses). Using historical information on pest population characteristics and crop susceptibility to time insecticide applications is included here. Informing spraying decisions by monitoring pests or crop damage within the present cropping season is included in 'Use pesticides only when pests or crop damage reach threshold levels'.
Here we present evidence from five of 13 studies testing this intervention.

Key Messages:
Natural enemies: One controlled study from the UK reported more natural enemies when insecticides were sprayed earlier rather than later in the growing season. Pests: Two of four studies from Mozambique, the UK and the USA found fewer pests or less disease damage when insecticides were applied early rather than late. Effects on a disease-carrying pest varied with insecticide type. Two studies (one a randomised, replicated, controlled test) found no effect on pests or pest damage. Yield: Four studies (including one randomised, replicated, controlled test) from Mozambique, the Philippines, the UK and the USA measured yields. Two studies found mixed effects and one study found no effect on yield when insecticides were applied early. One study found higher yields when insecticides were applied at times of suspected crop susceptibility.Profit and costs: One controlled study from the Philippines found higher profits and similar costs when insecticides were only applied at times of suspected crop susceptibility.
Crops studied were aubergine, barley, maize, pear and stringbean.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Natural Pest Control
Description: Natural Pest Control Synopsis
