1818: Directly plant peatland mosses
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This section considers introducing peatland vegetation by planting moss shoots, plants or sods directly into peat/soil. Plants may be collected from natural peatlands or grown in greenhouses/laboratories. Direct introduction of peatland vegetation might be necessary in severely degraded or bare peatlands. Natural revegetation (from remnant plants, seed banks or dispersal) might not happen, might be very slow or might not produce the desired mix of species.
Caution: Collecting vegetation from natural peatlands damages the donor site, although rapid recovery has been reported (Rochefort & Campeau 2002). 
Key peatland types where this action may be appropriate: bogs, fens/fen meadows, tropical peat swamps.
Related actions: spread vegetation onto peatland surface (mosses or mixed vegetation); introduce seeds (of herbs or shrubs/trees); restoration using more than three interventions, sometimes including planting; supporting interventions from this section used without introducing vegetation (e.g. mulching or fertilizing); experimental tests of interventions to complement planting (e.g. mulching or fertilizing).
Kooijman A.M., Beltman B. & Westhoff V. (1994) Extinction and reintroduction of the bryophyte Scorpidium scorpioides in a rich-fen spring site in the Netherlands. Biological Conservation, 69, 87–96.
Rochefort L. & Campeau S. (2002) Recovery of donor sites used for peatland restoration. Pages 244–251 in: G. Schmilewski & L. Rochefort (eds.) IPS Symposium Proceedings: Peat in horticulture – quality and environmental challenges. International Peat Society, Jyväskylä, Finland.
Sliva J. & Pfadenhauer J. (1999) Restoration of cut-over raised bogs in southern Germany – a comparison of methods. Applied Vegetation Science, 2, 137–148.

Key Messages:

Seven studies evaluated the effects on peatland vegetation of planting mosses. Six studies were in bogs and one was in a fen.
Survival (1 study): One study in Lithuania reported that of 50 Sphagnum-dominated sods planted into a rewetted bog, 47 survived for one year.
Growth (2 studies): Two before-and-after studies in a fen in the Netherlands and bog pools in the UK reported that mosses grew after planting.
Moss cover (5 studies): Five before-and-after studies in a fen in the Netherlands and bogs in Germany, Ireland, Estonia and Australia reported that after planting mosses, the area covered by moss increased in at least some cases. The study in the Netherlands reported spread of planted moss beyond the introduction site. The study in Australia was also controlled and reported that planted plots developed greater Sphagnum moss cover than unplanted plots.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
