2974: Change season/timing of livestock grazing: freshwater marshes
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Grazing could have different effects on wetland vegetation depending on the time of year at which it is done. For example, it might be beneficial to avoid grazing when certain plants are young/flowering so that they can grow/reproduce and contribute to the wetland vegetation. Additionally, the effects of trampling may vary by season, being lowest in summer when a seasonal wetland might be dry or winter when the soil may be frozen. Seasonal variation in the value of the wetland plants as food for livestock could also contribute to the decision of when to allow grazing.
To be summarized as evidence for this action, studies should have compared grazing in different seasons (e.g. summer vs winter) or in different temporal patterns (e.g. 0.5 cows/ha every summer vs 1 cow/ha every other summer). The overall grazing intensity and type of livestock must have been similar under each treatment.
Related actions: Exclude or remove livestock from historically grazed sites; Use grazing to maintain or restore disturbance; Use grazing to control problematic plants; Modify livestock farming practices in watershed.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of grazing freshwater marshes in different seasons or at different times. Two studies were in the USA and one was in Canada. In all three studies, the livestock were cattle.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study of freshwater marshes and wet meadows in the USA reported that plots grazed in the summer and autumn experienced similar changes in overall plant community composition over a year.
Relative abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study of ephemeral pools in the USA found that pools grazed in the dry or wet seasons had similar cover of grasses relative to forbs over three years.
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study of freshwater marshes in Canada found that in summer, marshes grazed in the summer/autumn contained more plant genera than marshes grazed in the spring/summer.
Native/non-target richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study of ephemeral pools in the USA found that pools grazed in the dry and wet seasons experienced similar changes in native plant richness over three years.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study of freshwater marshes and wet meadows the USA found that, in three of four habitat types, summer- and autumn-grazed plots experienced similar changes in live vegetation biomass over one year.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study of freshwater marshes in Canada found that in summer, marshes grazed in the summer/autumn contained taller emergent vegetation than marshes grazed in the spring/summer.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
