2504: Remove/control non-native mammals 
Effectiveness rating: Beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Non-native species are a threat to native fauna worldwide. Among mammals, non-native carnivores, typically transported by early European settlers, are especially a threat through predation of native species, including mammals, in locations with few native carnivore species. Non-native herbivores can have dramatic habitat impacts, and thus alter suitability of locations or food availability for native species. Control of non-native species can be expensive and benefits may be difficult to maintain, except in island situations where total elimination might be achievable. Nonetheless, actions aimed at reducing populations of non-native mammals may be carried out on an ongoing basis for the benefit of native species, including mammals.
See also: Remove/control non-native mammals within a fenced area and Remove or control predators.

Key Messages:

Twenty-five studies evaluated the effects on non-controlled mammals of removing or controlling non-native mammals. Twenty-one studies were in Australia, and one was in each of France, the UK, Equador and the USA.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (24 STUDIES)

Abundance (21 studies): Ten of 18 controlled, before-and-after or site comparison studies, in Australia, found that after controlling red foxes, abundances, densities or trapping frequencies increased for rock-wallaby spp., eastern grey kangaroo, woylie,, brush-tail possum, tammar wallaby, chuditch and quenda. Seven studies found mixed results with increases in some species but not others, increases followed by declines or increases only where cats as well as foxes were controlled. The other study found no increase in bush rat numbers with fox control. One of three replicated, before-and-after studies (including two controlled studies), in Australia, France and Ecuador, found that control of invasive rodents increased numbers of lesser white-toothed shrews and greater white-toothed shrews. One study found that Santiago rice rat abundance declined less with rodent control and one found mixed results, with increased numbers of short-tailed mice at one out of four study sites.
Survival (1 study): A replicated, controlled study in Australia found that controlling red foxes increased survival of juvenile eastern grey kangaroos.
Occupancy/range (3 studies): Three studies (two before-and-after, one controlled), in the UK and Australia, found that after controlling non-native American mink, red foxes and European rabbits, there were increases in ranges or proportions of sites occupied by water vole, common brushtail possum, long-nosed potoroo and southern brown bandicoot and four native small mammal species.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Behaviour change (1 study): A before-and-after study in the USA found that following removal of feral cats, vertebrate prey increased as a proportion of the diet of island foxes.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
