991: Thin trees within forest and woodland
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Thinning is a forestry practice that involves the selective removal of trees to reduce tree density and improve the growth rate and health of remaining trees. Thinning has been done historically to maximize timber production but may have ecological benefits. The retention of large old trees may provide roosting sites for bats and opening the canopy may provide favourable foraging habitats.
For studies that used thinning as part of selective logging methods, see the intervention ‘Use selective or reduced impact logging instead of conventional logging'.

Key Messages:

Eleven studies evaluated the effects of thinning trees within forest and woodland on bat populations. Six studies were in the USA, four were in Australia and one was in Canada.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Richness/diversity (2 studies): One replicated, site comparison study in Australia recorded the same bat species in thinned and unthinned forest, except for the chocolate wattled bat, which was not recorded in forests with unthinned regrowth. One replicated, site comparison study in Australia found that forest thinned up to 20 years previously had higher bat diversity than unthinned forest, but sites thinned more than 20 years previously did not differ.

POPULATION RESPONSE (11 STUDIES)

Abundance (11 studies): Five of six replicated, site comparison studies (including two paired sites studies and one controlled study) in the USA and Australia found higher overall bat activity (relative abundance) in thinned or thinned and burned forest than unthinned forest. The other study found similar overall bat activity in thinned and unthinned stands. One replicated, randomized, site comparison study in the USA found higher overall bat activity for three of four types of thinning and burning treatments. One replicated, site comparison study in Australia found that forest thinned up to eight years previously or more than 20 years previously had higher bat activity than unthinned forest, but sites thinned 8–20 years previously did not differ. Three replicated, controlled studies (including one site comparison and one before-and-after study) in Canada and Australia found that thinning increased the activity of some bat species but not others.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Bat Conservation
Description: Update 2020
