1534: Reduce primate predation by non-primate species through exclusion (e.g. fences) or translocation 
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
This intervention is important for primate species that are predated upon by non-primate species, such as large cats like leopards Panthera pardus, jaguars Panthera onca, cougars Puma concolor, raptors such as eagles Aquila spp., big snakes like pythons (Pythonidae) and Boa constrictor, as well as crocodiles (Crocodylinae) and caimans (Caimaninae). By excluding predator species by e.g., building predator-proof fences, or translocating predators elsewhere, this intervention may benefit the conservation of the primate population that the intervention is intended for. This is an invasive intervention and its usefulness should be carefully considered from an ethical perspective before implementing it.
            Controlling predation by other primate species is discussed under ‘Reduce primate predation by other primate species through exclusion (e.g. fences) or translocation’, controlling mammals that may alter the primate species’ habitat is discussed under ‘Control habitat-altering mammals (e.g. elephants) through exclusion (e.g. fences) or translocation’, and controlling competition for food with other species is discussed under ’Control inter-specific competition for food through exclusion (e.g. fences) or translocation’.

Key Messages:

We found no evidence for the effects of reducing primate predation by other non-primate species through exclusion or translocation on primate populations.

'No evidence' for an action means we have not yet found any studies that directly and quantitatively tested this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Primate Conservation
Description: Primate Synopsis
