976: Install underpasses or culverts as road/railway crossing structures for bats
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Underpasses may guide bats safely under roads or railways. They have the potential to reduce the number of bats killed by traffic and increase the permeability of roads/railways for bats to maintain connectivity across the landscape. There is evidence that an unknown proportion of bats of various species use underpasses below roads (e.g. Bach et al. 2004, Boonman 2011, Barros 2014). However, these studies have not been summarised here as they do not provide data that can be used to assess effectiveness, such as a control or the proportion of bats that are or are not using the underpasses. The studies described below report the proportion of bats that are either using underpasses to cross roads safely, or are crossing the road above them at risk of collisions with traffic. We did not find any studies that assessed underpasses below railways as crossing structures for bats.
Bach L., Burkhardt P. & Limpens H. (2004) Tunnels as a possibility to connect bat habitats. Mammalia, 68, 411–420.
Barros P. (2014) Agricultural underpasses: their importance for bats as roosts and role in facilitating movement across roads. Pasos agrícolas inferiores de carreteras: su importancia para los murciélagos como refugio y lugar para cruzar la vía. Barbastella, Journal of Bat Research & Conservation, 7, 22–31.
Boonman M. (2011) Factors determining the use of culverts underneath highways and railway tracks by bats in lowland areas. Lutra, 54, 3–16.

Key Messages:

Eight studies evaluated the effects of installing underpasses or culverts as road crossing structures for bats. Seven studies were in Europe and one in Australia.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (8 STUDIES)      

Use (8 studies): Eight studies (including six replicated studies) in Germany, Ireland, the UK, Australia and France found that bats used underpasses and culverts below roads, and crossed over the roads above them, in varying proportions. One replicated, site comparison study in Australia found that bat species adapted to cluttered habitats used small culverts and underpasses more than bat species adapted to open or edge habitats. One replicated, site comparison study in France found that the use of underpasses by five bat species was influenced by underpass type and height, road width, and the amount of forest and hedgerows in the surrounding landscape.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Bat Conservation
Description: Update 2020
