3162: Remove debris from brackish/salt marshes
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Large debris (e.g. building materials, tyres) and accumulations of small debris (e.g. plant litter, wrack, plastics) can damage marsh vegetation. Debris can shade and crush vegetation. Movement of debris with water flows or tides can increase the area impacted beyond the footprint of the debris itself. Debris could also provide a refuge for animals that might damage vegetation, or release toxic chemicals (Uhrin & Schellinger 2011). Debris might be deposited directly onto marshes by humans, or carried there by wind and water (e.g. storms and tsunamis; Valiela et al. 1998).
Related actions: Put up signs to discourage littering.
Uhrin A.V. & Schellinger J. (2011) Marine debris impacts to a tidal fringing-marsh in North Carolina. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 62, 2605–2610.
Valiela I., Peckol P., D’Avanzo C., Kremer J., Hersh D., Foreman K., Lajtha L., Seely B., Geyer W.R., Isaji R. & Crawford R. (1998) Ecological effects of major storms on coastal watersheds and coastal waters: Hurricane Bob on Cape Cod. Journal of Coastal Research, 14, 218–238.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of removing debris from brackish/salt marshes. Both studies were in the USA.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, paired, site comparison study in a salt marsh in the USA found that overall vegetation cover in patches where debris had been removed remained lower than in undisturbed marsh for one growing season, but had recovered to match undisturbed marsh after two growing seasons.
Individual species abundance (2 studies): Two studies quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. For example, the two replicated, site comparison studies in salt marshes in the USA found that the abundance of dominant herb species in impacted vegetation patches was typically lower than in undisturbed marsh one growing season after removing debris, but was sometimes similar to undisturbed marsh. The results depended on the species, metric and type of debris removed. One of the studies also monitored until the second growing season after removing debris; at this point, the cover of both dominant herb species had recovered to match undisturbed marsh.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (1 study): One replicated, before-and-after, site comparison study in a salt marsh in the USA found that the maximum height of smooth cordgrass recovered, to match undisturbed marsh, within 45 weeks of removing debris.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
