3070: Change season/timing of cutting/mowing: freshwater marshes
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Cutting/mowing could have different effects on vegetation depending on the time of year at which it is done. For example, it might be beneficial to avoid disturbance when certain plants are young/flowering so that they can grow/reproduce and contribute to the community. The season of disturbance can also affect nutrient levels and impacts to soils by trampling or vehicles.
To be summarized as evidence in this section, studies should have compared a fixed frequency and intensity of cutting/mowing, but in different seasons (e.g. summer vs winter) or in different temporal patterns (e.g. 50% of plants cut every summer vs 100% of plants cut every other summer).
Related actions: Change season/timing of vegetation harvest, including studies of cutting where vegetation is removed; Reduce frequency of cutting/mowing; Reduce intensity of cutting/mowing; Cut/mow herbaceous plants to maintain or restore disturbance; Use cutting/mowing to control problematic herbaceous plants.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of cutting/mowing freshwater marshes in different seasons or at different times. There was one study in each of Switzerland, the Netherlands, Belgium and Japan.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community composition (2 studies): Two replicated, randomized, paired, controlled studies in wet meadows in Switzerland and farmland ditches in the Netherlands reported that cutting vegetation in different seasons typically had similar effects on the overall plant community composition, over 1–4 years.
Overall richness/diversity (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in farmland ditches in the Netherlands found that marshy areas cut in May and areas cut in November typically contained a similar number of plant species, when surveyed in July. One replicated, paired, controlled study of wet grasslands in Belgium reported that the effect of a single mow between June and November on overall plant species richness depended on the month of mowing.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study of wet grasslands in Belgium reported that the effect of a single mow between June and November on overall vegetation abundance (including litter) depended on the month of mowing.
Individual species abundance (4 studies): All four studies quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. The studies all reported that the abundance of some plant species responded differently to cutting in different seasons. The controlled, before-and-after study in Japan, for example, reported that cutting in June reduced the abundance of common reed Phragmites australis in the following summer more than cutting in July.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Overall structure (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in wet meadows in Switzerland reported that summer-mown and winter-mown plots both experienced a shift in vegetation cover towards lower vegetation layers, over 3–4 years.
Diameter/perimeter/area (1 study): The same study reported that summer-mowing and winter-mowing had opposite effects on the diameter of common reed Phragmites australis shoots: they became thinner over four years of summer mowing but thicker over three years of winter mowing.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
