2591: Install wildlife warning reflectors along roads
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Reflectors are installed on posts along the edge of the road, a certain distance apart and at the height of the average vehicle headlamp. At night, as vehicle lights approach, the reflectors glow brighter and create an “optical fence” as light from headlights is reflected onto roadside habitat, which aims to deter wildlife from approaching the road until the vehicle has passed. Polished stainless steel wildlife mirrors can also be installed to reflect the headlights from passing cars causing light to flicker sharp, pencil-like beams that aim to startle animals and stop them moving until the lights have passed.

Key Messages:

Fifteen studies evaluated the effects on mammals of installing wildlife warning reflectors along roads. Nine studies were in the USA, three were in Austalia, two were in Germany and one was in Denmark.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (10 STUDIES)

Abundance (1 study): A before-and-after study in Australia found that when warning reflectors were installed (along with speed restrictions, reflective wildlife signs, rumble strips, wildlife escape ramps and an educational pamphlet) a small population of eastern quoll re-established in the area.
Survival (10 studies): Five of eight controlled or before-and-after studies in the USA and Germany found that wildlife warning reflectors did not reduce collisions between vehicles and deer. Two studies found that vehicle-deer collisions were reduced by reflectors and one found that collisions were reduced in rural areas but increased in suburban areas. A before-and-after study in Australia found that when warning reflectors were installed (along with speed restrictions, reflective wildlife signs, rumble strips, wildlife escape ramps and an educational pamphlet) vehicle collisions with Tasmanian devils, but not eastern quolls, decreased. A review of two studies in Australia found mixed responses of mammal road deaths to wildlife warning reflectors.

BEHAVIOUR (5 STUDIES)

Behaviour change (5 studies): Three of four studies (including three controlled studies), in the USA, Denmark and Germany, found that wildlife warning reflectors did not cause deer to behave in ways that made collisions with vehicles less likely (such as by avoiding crossing roads). The other study found that deer initially responded to wildlife reflectors with alarm and flight but then became habituated. A replicated, controlled study in Australia found that one of four reflector model/colour combinations increased fleeing behaviour of bush wallabies when lights approached. The other combinations had no effect and none of the combinations affected red kangaroos.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
