3258: Directly plant trees/shrubs: freshwater wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This action involves planting whole emergent plants, directly into soil or sediment, to restore/create marshes or swamps. These plants might be individual seedlings, rooted cuttings or mature plants. Plants may be raised in greenhouses/laboratories, or collected from natural sites (with potential damage to donor site; Laegdsgaard 2002).
Introduction of target vegetation might be useful in severely degraded or bare sites – which may lack remnant plants or seed banks to kick start revegetation with desirable species, and may be at risk of being taken over by undesirable species (Brown & Bedford 1997). It might also be useful in isolated wetlands, far from sources of marsh or swamp plant propagules. However, note that up-front costs can be high.
The effects of planting may be highly dependent on the environmental conditions in each study. Questions you might ask when interpreting the evidence include: Is the study site degraded? Where and when was vegetation planted? Was there any intervention to improve conditions before planting? What were the environmental conditions over the duration of the study?
The scope of this action does not include planting nurse plants; planting submerged or floating plants; planting to restore bogs, fens, fen meadows or peat swamp forests (see Taylor et al. 2018); planting facultative wetland plants in upland sites; or planting for commercial purposes (e.g. mangrove plantations; Kaly & Jones 1998). In contrast, the scope does include planting non-native species to conserve marshes or swamps – whilst acknowledging that this is often considered ethically unacceptable due to the risk of invasion (e.g. Ren et al. 2009).
Related actions: Introduce vegetation fragments; Introduce seeds or propagules; Transplant or replace wetland soil; Introduce organisms to control problematic plants; Introduce nurse plants; Restore/create marshes or swamps using multiple interventions, often including planting.
Brown S.C. & Bedford B.L. (1997) Restoration of wetland vegetation with transplanted wetland soil: an experimental study. Wetlands, 17, 424–437.
Kaly U.L. & Jones G.P. (1998) Mangrove restoration: a potential tool for coastal management in tropical developing countries. Ambio, 27, 656–661.
Laegdsgaard P. (2002) Recovery of small denuded patches of the dominant NSW coastal saltmarsh species (Sporobolus virginicus and Sarcocornia quinqueflora) and implications for restoration using donor sites. Ecological Management & Restoration, 3, 202–206.
Ren H., Lu H., Shen W., Huang C., Guo Q., Li Z. & Jian S. (2009) Sonneratia apetala Buch.Ham in the mangrove ecosystems of China: an invasive species or restoration species? Ecological Engineering, 35, 1243–1248.
Taylor N.G., Grillas P. & Sutherland W.J. (2018) Peatland Conservation: Global Evidence for the Effects of Interventions to Conserve Peatland Vegetation. Synopses of Conservation Evidence Series. University of Cambridge, Cambridge.

Key Messages:

Seventeen studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of directly planting trees/shrubs in freshwater wetlands. Fifteen studies were in the USA. Two were in Australia. Two of the studies took place in the same site, but used different experimental set-ups.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community composition (2 studies): Two replicated studies of freshwater wetlands in the USA found that planting trees/shrubs (sometimes along with other interventions) had no significant effect on aspects of plant community composition, after 1–11 years. Specifically, planted and unplanted wetlands had a similar proportion of species in different plant groups and relative abundance of different plant groups.
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled, before-and-after study in depressional wetlands in the USA found that wetlands sparsely planted with tree seedlings contained a similar number of plant species, after 1–4 years, to unplanted wetlands.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (2 studies): Two replicated studies (one site comparison; one randomized, controlled, before-and-after) of freshwater wetlands in the USA found that planting trees/shrubs (sometimes along with other interventions) had no significant effect on overall vegetation cover (both ground and canopy, separately or combined) after 1–11 years.
Herb abundance (1 study): One study in a former firing range in the USA simply quantified herb cover approximately 1–2 years after reprofiling the site and planting trees/shrubs.
Tree/shrub abundance (1 study): One study in a former firing range in the USA simply quantified woody plant cover approximately 1–2 years after reprofiling the site and planting trees/shrubs.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Visual obstruction (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that swamps created by planting trees/shrubs (after reprofiling) had less horizontal vegetation cover, after 7–11 years, than nearby swamps recovering naturally from logging.
Height (6 studies): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that swamps created by planting trees/shrubs (after reprofiling) contained shorter woody vegetation, after 7–11 years, than nearby swamps recovering naturally from logging. Herbaceous vegetation, however, was of similar height. Five studies (four replicated) in freshwater wetlands in the USA simply quantified the height of trees and shrubs over 1–6 growing seasons after they were planted; in four of these studies, the average height typically increased over time.
Diameter (1 study): One study in a freshwater wetland in the USA reported an increase in the diameter of surviving trees over the year after they were planted.
Basal area (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that swamps created by planting trees/shrubs (after reprofiling) had a lower vegetation basal area, after 7–11 years, than nearby swamps recovering naturally from logging.

OTHER

Survival (15 studies): Fifteen studies (including eight replicated) in the USA and Australia quantified survival of individual trees/shrubs planted in freshwater wetlands. Survival rates ranged from 0% to 100% after 4–66 months. Seven of the studies (including six replicated) in the USA and Australia reported 0% survival of planted vegetation in at least some cases, after 1–6 growing seasons. Proposed factors affecting survival included elevation/water levels, the season of planting, protection from herbivores, root pruning, extreme weather, and if/how invasive vegetation was removed before planting.
Growth (2 studies): Two studies monitored true growth of individual trees/shrubs (rather than changes in average height of survivors). The two studies, in freshwater wetlands in the USA, reported that planted trees grew in diameter and/or height over their first 1–2 growing seasons.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
