1804: Restore/create peatland vegetation using the moss layer transfer technique
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
The moss layer transfer technique (Quinty & Rochefort 2003; Rochefort et al. 2013) combines multiple interventions to restore peatlands: (1) Rewetting the peat, for example by blocking drainage ditches or building water-retaining ridges. (2) Reprofiling the peat i.e. clearing and flattening the peat surface. Surface peat may be pushed into water-retaining ridges around or across the peatland, achieving steps 1 and 2 in one go. (3) Spreading plant fragments collected from the surface (top 10 cm) of a nearby bog. (4) Adding a straw mulch to provide shade and keep the surface of the peat moist. (5) Fertilizing with phosphorous to stimulate growth of nurse plants such as haircap moss. To be included as evidence in this section, studies must have tested all five steps in combination – although fertilizing is an optional step that is not always appropriate (e.g. Karofeld et al. 2016).
The moss layer transfer technique is typically used to restore bogs damaged by peat extraction. Whether it is more appropriate to introduce vegetation from bogs or fens will depend on the chemistry of the peat remaining in the degraded peatland (Quinty & Rochefort 2003). In this section, restored refers to areas where restoration interventions have been applied (i.e. undergoing the process of restoration) rather than the state of those areas (i.e. whether they have been successfully restored).
Caution: Collecting plant fragments damages the donor site, although rapid recovery has been reported (Rochefort & Campeau 2002).
Key peatland types where this action may be appropriate: bogs, fens/fen meadows, tropical peat swamps.
Related actions: restoration using other combinations of multiple interventions. Interventions within the moss layer transfer technique, tested individually: rewetting; reprofiling; sowing mosses or mixed vegetation; adding mulch after planting; fertilizing to complement planting.
Karofeld E., Müür M. & Vellak K. (2016) Factors affecting re-vegetation dynamics of experimentally restored extracted peatland in Estonia. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 23, 13706–13717.
Quinty F. & Rochefort L. (2003) Peatland Restoration Guide, Second Edition. Canadian Sphagnum Peat Moss Association and New Brunswick Department of Natural Resources and Energy. Quebec, Canada.
Rochefort L. & Campeau S. (2002) Recovery of donor sites used for peatland restoration. Pages 244–251 in: G. Schmilewski & L. Rochefort (eds.) IPS Symposium Proceedings: Peat in horticulture – quality and environmental challenges. International Peat Society, Jyväskylä, Finland.
Rochefort L., Isselin-Nondedeu F., Boudreau S. & Poulin M. (2013) Comparing survey methods for monitoring vegetation change through time in a restored peatland. Wetlands Ecology and Management, 21, 71–85.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects, on peatland vegetation, of restoration using the moss layer transfer technique (as defined in the Background section). All four studies were based on bogs in Canada. Three studies were based on one experimental set-up that was included in the other, larger study.
Plant community composition (2 studies): One replicated study in bogs in Canada reported that the majority of restored areas developed a community of bog-characteristic plant species within 11 years. One controlled, before-and-after study in a bog in Canada reported that a restored area (included in the previous study) developed a more peatland-characteristic plant community over time, and relative to an unrestored area.
Vegetation cover (2 studies): Two controlled studies in one bog in Canada reported that a restored area had greater moss or bryophyte cover (including Sphagnum) than an unrestored area after 4–8 years. The restored area also had greater herb cover (including cottongrass), but less shrub cover, than the unrestored area. One of the studies reported that vegetation in the restored area became more similar to local natural bogs.
Overall plant richness/diversity (1 study): One controlled, before-and-after study in a bog in Canada reported that a restored area contained more plant species than an unrestored area.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
