1813: Cover peatland with organic mulch (without planting)
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Peatland vegetation may be killed by hot, dry conditions on bare peat surfaces (e.g. Sagot & Rochefort 1996). Organic mulches (e.g. straw, grass cuttings or shrub roots) can be placed on the peatland surface to stabilize temperatures and humidity, and provide shade. This may create a more hospitable environment for establishment and growth of peatland vegetation (Good et al. 2009). Typically, mulch is applied sparsely enough that some light can still reach the peat surface. Caution: Mulches may contain seeds of undesirable plants. Sterilization before application can kill these.
This section considers the effect of adding mulch without adding living vegetation. The mulch is intended to help existing vegetation e.g. remnant moss patches, or seedlings that germinate from seeds already in the peat.
Key peatland types where this action may be appropriate: bogs, fens/fen meadows, tropical peat swamps.
Related actions: cover peat with something other than mulch e.g. plastic sheets or shade cloths; add mulch after planting.
Good R., Wright G., Whinam J. & Hope G. (2009) Restoration of mires of the Australian Alps following the 2003 wildfires. Pages 353–362 in: S.G. Haberle, J. Stevenson & M. Prebble (eds.) Altered Ecologies: Fire, Climate and Human Influence on Terrestrial Landscapes. Terra Australis 32, Australian National University e-press, Canberra, Australia.
Sagot C. & Rochefort L. (1996) Tolérance des sphaignes à la dessiccation (Tolerance of Sphagnum mosses to desiccation; in French). Cryptogamie, Bryology-Lichénologie, 17, 171–183.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects, on peatland vegetation, of covering a peatland with organic mulch (without planting). Both studies were in bogs (but in one study, being restored as a fen).
Vegetation cover (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in a bog in Canada found that covering bare peat with straw mulch did not affect cover of fen-characteristic plants. One replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in a bog in Australia reported that plots mulched with straw had similar Sphagnum moss cover to unmulched plots.
Characteristic plants (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in a bog in Canada found that covering bare peat with straw mulch increased the number of fen characteristic plants present, but did not affect their cover.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
