3191: Restore/create brackish/saline marshes or swamps (specific action unclear)
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This section includes studies that aimed to “restore” or “create” marshes or swamps, but did not clearly describe the specific action(s) that were done. Commonly, this occurs when the primary focus of a study is an animal taxon, so details of vegetation restoration were not deemed relevant by the authors. Alternatively, if the study involves actions carried out historically, details of the action may be unavailable.
Several studies in this section refer to conservatism scores and a floristic quality index. Conservatism scores reflect the fidelity of individual plant species to undegraded natural habitats in the study region. The floristic quality index is the product of the average conservatism score for all plant species in a community and the square root of the number of species.
This section does not include studies that simply report the area or number of sites “restored” or “created”, without quantifying the vegetation in those sites.

Key Messages:

Seven studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of restoring/creating brackish/saline marshes or swamps using unclear or incompletely described actions. Four studies were in the USA. There was one study in each of Australia, Canada and Indonesia.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community composition (4 studies): Three replicated, site comparison studies in the USA and Australia reported that the overall plant or algal community composition in restored/created marshes typically became more like natural reference marshes over time. One replicated, site comparison study of fresh/brackish wetlands in Canada reported that the overall plant community was lower quality in restored/created sites than natural sites, after ≥3 years.
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study of salt marshes in the USA found that created marshes had similar overall plant diversity, after 1–14 years, to natural marshes. Created marshes had lower plant species richness than natural marshes on average, but richness became more similar to natural marshes with time since creation.
Algae/phytoplankton richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, paired, site comparison study of brackish/saline marshes in the USA reported that restored and natural marshes contained a similar number of algal species, and found that they had similar algal diversity, after 1–28 years.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (2 studies): One replicated, site comparison study of salt marshes in the USA found that created marshes contained less overall plant biomass, after 1–14 years, than natural marshes – but that biomass increased with time since creation. One replicated, site comparison study of fresh/brackish/saline marshes in the USA found that created (but not restored) marshes had similar overall vegetation cover to natural marshes. Both created and restored marshes had similar cover of wetland vegetation to natural marshes.
Herb abundance (2 studies): One replicated, paired, site comparison study of brackish/saline marshes in the USA reported that restored marshes contained a greater density of cordgrasses Spartina than natural marshes in six of eight comparisons. Vegetation was surveyed 1–28 years after restoration, which involved planting cordgrasses. One replicated, paired site comparison study in the USA reported that created intertidal wetlands contained more smooth cordgrass Spartina alterniflora than nearby natural mangrove forests for around 13 years.
Tree/shrub abundance (2 studies): One replicated, paired site comparison study in the USA reported that created intertidal wetlands contained fewer adult mangrove trees than nearby natural mangrove forests for up to 20 years – but predicted equivalence within 55 years. One replicated study in Indonesia simply quantified the density of tree seedlings three years after restoration of former mangrove ponds.
Algae/phytoplankton abundance (1 study): One paired, site comparison study of brackish/saline marshes in the USA reported that older restored marshes (≥26 years old) contained a similar or greater abundance of algae to natural marshes, whereas younger restored marshes (&lt;13 years old) contained less algae than natural marshes.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Diameter/perimeter/area (1 study): One replicated, paired site comparison study in the USA reported that created intertidal wetlands contained thinner adult mangrove trees than nearby natural mangrove forests for up to 20 years – but predicted equivalence within 25 years.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
