3590: Install exclusion devices on fishing gear: Tortoises, terrapins, side-necked & softshell turtles
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Aquatic reptiles may become trapped or entangled in fishing nets (e.g. trawl nets, hoop nets, fyke nets) and traps. Exclusion devices, such as grids, mesh, funnels, rings, or rectangular inserts, can be installed in an attempt to reduce the number of non-target animals that are caught.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group. See here for: Sea turtles; Snakes & lizards or Crocodilians.
For studies that discuss the effect of using devices that allow reptiles to escape from fishing gear, see Install escape devices on fishing gear, and for studies on the effect of using a combination of exclusion and escape devices see Install exclusion and escape devices on fishing gear.

Key Messages:

Thirteen studies evaluated the effects of installing exclusion devices on fishing gear on tortoise, terrapin, side-necked & softshell turtle populations. Ten studies were in the USA, two were in Canada and one was in Australia.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Survival (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the USA found that fewer turtles died in hoop nets with an exclusion device than in unmodified traps.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Use (1 study): One randomized, controlled trial in the USA found mixed effects of crab pot exclusion devices on use of pots by diamondback terrapins depending on the device design.

OTHER (13 STUDIES)

Unwanted catch (13 studies): Eight of 13 controlled studies (including seven replicated, paired studies) in the USA, Australia and Canada found that crab pots, fyke nets, hoop nets and eel traps with exclusion devices caught fewer turtles, diamond back terrapins and short-necked turtles than unmodified gear. Two studies also found that modified gear caught smaller short-necked turtles and diamondback terrapins than unmodified gear. Three studies found mixed effects of exclusion devices on unwanted catch of turtles and diamondback terrapins depending on the device design. The other two studies found that that crab pots with wire exclusion devices or magnetized exclusion devices caught a similar number of diamondback terrapins compared to unmodified pots. One study also found that crab pots with wire exclusion devices caught larger diamondback terrapins than pots with plastic exclusion devices.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
