1966: Maintain bat roosts in road/railway bridges and culverts
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Bats can roost in gaps, cracks or between beams within road or railway bridges and culverts (e.g. Feldhamer et al. 2003, Celuch & Sevcík 2008, Geluso & Mink 2009). A study in the USA found over four million bats of 24 species roosting in 211 road bridges and culverts (Keeley & Tuttle 1999). Maintenance, repairs, or bridge/culvert replacement work may result in the loss of potential roost sites, entombment or injury of roosting bats, and abandonment of roosts and/or young.
For a similar intervention see ‘Create spaces for roosting bats in road/railway bridges and culverts’.
Celuch M. & Sevcík M. (2008) Road bridges as roosts for noctules (Nyctalus noctula) and other bat species in Slovakia (Chiroptera: Vespertilionidae). Lynx, 39, 47–54.
Feldhamer G.A., Carter T.C., Morzillo A.T. & Nicholson E.H. (2003) Use of bridges as day roosts by bats in Southern Illinois. Transactions of the Illinois State Academy of Science, 96, 107–112.
Geluso K. & Mink J.N. (2009) Use of bridges by bats (Mammalia: Chiroptera) in the Rio Grande Valley, New Mexico. The Southwestern Naturalist, 54, 421–429.
Keeley B.W. & Tuttle M. (1999) Bats in American bridges. Bat Conservation International, Austin, Texas, USA.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects of maintaining bat roosts within road bridges on bat populations. One study was in Ireland and one in the USA.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (2 STUDIES)      

Use (2 studies): One before-and-after study in Ireland found that a maternity colony of Daubenton’s bats continued to roost in a road bridge over a river in similar numbers after crevices were retained during repair work. One review in the USA found that when bat roosts were maintained during bridge replacement works, Yuma myotis and Mexican free-tailed bats recolonised most roosts in similar numbers to before the works, but pallid bats did not return.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Bat Conservation
Description: Update 2020
