3723: Translocate adult or juvenile reptiles: Tuatara
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Translocations involve the intentional capture, movement and release of wild-caught reptiles into the wild to re-establish a population that has been lost, or to augment an existing population. This can reduce the risk of inbreeding; help safeguard small populations from extinction due to catastrophic events and/or increase the occupied range. Translocations can also be used to move reptiles to areas where threats have been removed, such as islands where invasive predators have been eradicated. However, translocations are typically expensive and may risk spreading pathogens to previously unexposed areas.
Release techniques vary considerably, from ‘hard releases’ involving the simple release of individuals into the wild, to ‘soft releases’ that involve a variety of adaptation and acclimatisation techniques before release or post-release feeding and care.
This action includes studies which may combine different release techniques, but studies that explicitly test these different techniques are summarized separately under Use holding pens or enclosures at release site prior to release of wild reptiles; Use holding pens or enclosures at release site prior to release of captive-bred reptiles and Release reptiles into burrows.
This action includes the translocation of wild juvenile or adult reptiles. Relocations of eggs and nests, releases of captive bred individuals and releases of head-started individuals (reptiles of wild-origin reared in captivity prior to release) are discussed under: Relocate nests/eggs; Release captive-bred reptiles into the wild; Head-start wild-caught reptiles for release and Release reptiles born/hatched in captivity from wild-collected eggs/wild-caught females without rearing. For studies that release reptiles outside of their native range see Release reptiles outside of their native range.
Translocations that are carried out to mitigate against specific threats (for example translocating problem individuals away from a specific area, or translocating individuals away from development areas) are summarized under Mitigation translocations – Translocate problem reptiles; Translocate reptiles away from threats and Temporarily move reptiles away from short-term threats.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians. See here for: Sea turtles; Tortoises, terrapins, side-necked & softshell turtles; Snakes; Lizards or Crocodilians.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects of translocating tuatara on their populations. Three studies were in New Zealand and one was global.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (4 STUDIES)

Abundance (2 studies): One global review reported that 15 of 47 reptile translocations resulted in stable or growing populations (review included both wild-caught and captive bred animals). One study in New Zealand found that nine years after a translocation of 32 tuatara to an island where they had previously gone extinct, there was a population of 50 individuals.
Reproductive success (2 studies): One of two studies (including one controlled study) in New Zealand reported successful reproduction in one population of translocated tuatara. The other study reported no breeding during the six years following translocation.
Survival (2 studies): Two studies (including one controlled study) in New Zealand reported that 61–73% of translocated tuatara were recaptured over a six year period or survived for 9–12 month following release.
Condition (1 study): One controlled study in New Zealand found that translocated adult tuatara increased their body weight by 41% following release.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
