2997: Reduce frequency of vegetation harvest: freshwater marshes
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Harvesting vegetation less often (e.g. every two years instead of every year) will allow more time for it to recover from the disturbance, potentially growing taller and more densely. It might give plants long enough to mature and reproduce. Caution: In some habitats, regular disturbance such as harvesting may be necessary to maintain the composition and diversity of plant and animal communities.
For this action, “reduction” includes stopping harvest altogether. Note that studies comparing areas that remain unharvested to areas that become harvested, at any frequency, are not summarized as evidence for this action.
Related actions: Reduce intensity of vegetation harvest; Reduce frequency of cutting/mowing, including studies where cut vegetation is not removed.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of reducing the frequency of harvest in freshwater marshes (or harvesting at different frequencies). There was one study in each of the USA, Belgium and Italy.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in wet grasslands in Belgium reported that overall plant species richness was similar in plots harvested once or twice/year.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in wet grasslands in Belgium reported that the effect of harvesting twice/year (in July and October) on total above-ground biomass was intermediate between the effects of harvesting once/year in July or October.
Individual species abundance (3 studies): All three studies quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. For example, one replicated, paired, controlled study in freshwater marshes in the USA reported that cattail Typha biomass was greater, nine months after the last harvest, in plots harvested every six weeks than in plots harvested every three weeks. One paired, controlled, before-and-after study in reedbeds in Italy found that the common reed Phragmites australis biomass was similar in plots harvested once or twice/year, when measured at least five months after the last harvest.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
