3893: Use fencing to reduce pesticide and nutrient run-off into margins, waterways and ponds 
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
In conventional farming, a wide range of chemicals are commonly applied for pest control or fertilization, but these can have lethal or sub-lethal effects on farmland wildlife, including butterflies and moths (Russell & Schultz 2010, Schultz et al. 2016). Chemicals can spread easily from farmland into adjacent habitats, either by drifting on the wind during spraying, or by leaching through the soil in water. Physical barriers may be used to reduce the spread of chemicals from farmland on to neighbouring habitats.
For studies on restricting chemical applications next to adjacent habitat, or at the edge of crops, see “Provide buffer strips to reduce pesticide and nutrient run-off into margins, waterways and ponds” and “Leave headlands in fields unsprayed (conservation headlands)”.
Russell C. & Schultz C.B. (2010) Effects of grass-specific herbicides on butterflies: an experimental investigation to advance conservation efforts. Journal of Insect Conservation, 14, 53–63.
Schultz C.B., Zemaitis J.L., Thomas C.C., Bowers M.D. & Crone E.E. (2016) Non-target effects of grass-specific herbicides differ among species, chemicals and host plants in Euphydryas butterflies. Journal of Insect Conservation, 20, 867–877.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of using fencing to reduce pesticide and nutrient run-off into margins, waterways and ponds.

‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
