3399: Plant grassland plants
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
This action considers the introduction of grassland plants by planting directly into soil. Plants may be collected from natural grasslands or grown in greenhouses before planting. If successful, this method of restoration may allow for relatively rapid recovery of degraded grasslands.

Key Messages:

Four studies examined the effects of planting grassland plants on grassland vegetation. One study was in each of the UK, Germany and the USA. One review included studies from the UK and Australia.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY (2 STUDIES)

Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the USA found that planting seedlings in addition to sowing seeds increased the number of plant species compared to sowing seeds alone.
Grass richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the UK found that planting plants increased species richness of grasses in 50% of cases.
Forb richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the UK found that planting plants increased species richness of forbs in 83% of cases.
Native/non-target richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the USA found that planting plants in addition to sowing seeds increased the number of native plant species compared to sowing seeds alone.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE (2 STUDIES)

Individual plant species abundance (1 study): One study in Germany found that transplanted pepper saxifrage plants increased in number and spread to adjacent grassland.
Sown/planted species abundance (1 study): One review in the UK and Australia found that planting grassland plants had mixed effects on planted species abundance.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (1 STUDY)

Survival (1 study): One study in Germany found that 44% of new seedlings from transplanted pepper saxifrage plants survived over four months.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Grassland Conservation
Description: Grassland Synopsis
