1732: Cut/remove/thin forest plantations and rewet peat
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This section considers the threat from forest plantations on peatlands. Forests can dry out peatlands (trees take up water and reduce inputs from rainfall), create shade that prevents ground vegetation from growing, and cause peat to subside under the weight of the trees (Lindsay et al. 2014). Peatland vegetation may recover if trees are felled, but the process may be sped up by additional interventions to raise the water table to rewet the surface peat (e.g. blocking drainage ditches).
This section includes cutting/thinning, combined with rewetting, of afforested peatlands (where trees have been deliberately planted) and tree-colonized peatlands (where trees have colonized by themselves, for example after drainage for forestry). By comparison, peatlands with natural tree cover are described as forested or swamps. Clear-cutting refers to felling and removal of all trees from a site.
Key peatland types where this action may be appropriate: bogs, fens/fen meadows, tropical peat swamps.
Related actions: removal of forestry plantations alone; rewetting alone, if peatland has been drained; cutting large trees/shrubs on peatlands, not within forestry plantations.
Lindsay R., Birnie R. & Clough J. (2014) Ecological Impacts of Forestry on Peatlands. IUCN UK Peatland Programme Briefing Note No. 4.

Key Messages:

Eleven studies evaluated the effects of cutting/removing trees and rewetting peat (in combination): six in fens, two in bogs, and three in both fens and bogs. In four of the studies, the peatlands naturally contained some trees. Three studies were based on one experimental set-up, and two studies were based on another.
Plant community composition (5 studies): Of three replicated studies in fens, two in Finland found that removing trees/rewetting had no effect on the overall plant community composition whilst one in Sweden reported only a small effect. Two site comparison studies in bogs and fens in Finland found that removing trees/rewetting changed the overall plant community composition. It became less like sites that remained drained and forested.
Characteristic plants (2 studies): Two before-and-after studies (one site comparison, one controlled) in bogs and fens in Finland and Sweden reported that removing trees/rewetting increased the abundance of wetland-characteristic plants.
Moss cover (6 studies): Of five studies that examined the effect of removing trees/rewetting on Sphagnum moss, two replicated, paired studies in bogs and fens in Sweden and Finland found that the intervention increased Sphagnum cover. One replicated, before-and-after, site comparison study in forested fens in Finland found no effect. Two before-and-after studies in a bog in Finland and a fen in Sweden found mixed effects depending on site or species. Additionally, three studies (two replicated and paired) in peatlands in the UK and Finland found that removing trees/rewetting reduced cover of non-Sphagnum or forest-characteristic mosses. However, one replicated, before-and-after, site comparison study in forested fens in Finland found no effect of thinning trees/rewetting on forest mosses.
Herb cover (7 studies): Seven studies (including two replicated, paired, controlled) in bogs and fens in the UK, Finland and Sweden reported that removing trees/rewetting increased cover of at least one group of herbs, including cottongrasses and sedges. However, one of these studies reported loss of cottongrass from a fen where it was rare before intervention, along with reduced purple moor grass cover.
Vegetation structure (4 studies): One replicated site comparison study in a bog in the UK found that removing trees/rewetting increased ground vegetation height. One replicated, paired, controlled study in a fen in Sweden reported that removing trees/rewetting had no effect on canopy height after eight years. Two replicated, paired, site comparison studies in bogs and fens in Finland found that thinning trees/rewetting reduced the number of tall trees present for 1–3 years (although not to the level of natural peatlands).
Overall plant richness/diversity (4 studies): Two replicated, paired, controlled studies in rich fens in Sweden reported that removing trees/rewetting increased plant species richness. However, two replicated studies in fens in Finland found that removing trees/rewetting had no effect on total plant species richness or diversity.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
