3799: Relocate nests/eggs for artificial incubation: Crocodilians
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Relocating eggs to artificially incubate them may be used as a way to maximise hatching success as the eggs will no longer be vulnerable to natural threats such as predation. Consideration must be given to the potential impacts of incubation conditions (for example temperature and humidity) on the sex, size, shape, colour, behaviour, movement ability and post-hatching growth of reptile hatchlings (Warner & Andrews 2002, Booth et al. 2006).
This action includes studies where eggs are incubated in artificial conditions, which ranges from controlled laboratory settings to using polystyrene boxes to incubate eggs in buildings. Studies are also included where gravid females are brought into captivity to lay eggs, but eggs are taken away from the females for artificial incubation.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians. See here for: Sea turtles; Tortoises, terrapins, side-necked & softshell turtles; Snakes & lizards or Tuatara.
For studies that discuss the effects of relocating and re-burying eggs in natural habitats to avoid threats, see Relocate nests/eggs to a hatchery and Relocate nests/eggs to nearby natural setting (not including hatcheries).
See also Maintain wild-caught, gravid females in captivity during gestation and Alter incubation temperatures to achieve optimal/desired sex ratio.
Booth D.T. (2006) Influence of incubation temperature on hatchling phenotype in reptiles. Physiological and Biochemical Zoology, 79, 274–281.
Warner D.A. & Andrews R.M. (2002) Laboratory and field experiments identify sources of variation in phenotypes and survival of hatchling lizards. Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 76, 105–124.

Key Messages:

Six studies evaluated the effects of relocating nests/eggs for artificial incubation on crocodilian populations. Two studies were in the USA and one study was in each of Zimbabwe, Argentina, Venezuela and Australia.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (6 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (5 studies): Two replicated studies in Zimbabwe and the USA reported that hatching success for 20,000 Nile crocodile eggs and &gt;30,000 American alligator eggs that were artificially incubated was 74% and 61%. Two studies (including one replicated study) in Argentina and Venezuela reported that 43–100% of road-snouted caiman eggs, 66% of American crocodile eggs and 54% of Orinoco crocodile eggs hatched successfully following artificial incubation. One replicated, before-and-after study in Australia reported that hatching success of artificially incubated saltwater crocodile eggs differed when the project was under local compared to external management.
Condition (1 study): One replicated, controlled, paired study in the USA found that American alligator eggs relocated for artificial incubation produced larger hatchlings than eggs left in situ.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
