3950: Manage wetlands or ponds by grazing or cutting to prevent succession
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Wetlands support a number of specialist butterfly and moth species, but this habitat requires some form of disturbance to prevent succession into scrub or woodland. In natural systems, this may have been provided by seasonal flooding and wild grazing animals, but flooding may not be possible in wetlands constrained by surrounding human land use. Cutting or mowing wetlands, or grazing with domestic livestock, may be able to replace natural disturbance regimes, but the frequency and timing of management may be important for benefitting, or avoiding harm to, particular species.
For studies on the creation or restoration of wetlands by either multiple actions (which may include grazing or cutting) or where the specific action is not clear, see “Restore or create wetlands and floodplains”. For studies on other actions for wetland management and restoration, see “Replant native vegetation” and “Natural system modifications – Use prescribed fire to maintain or restore disturbance in grasslands or other open habitats”.
For studies on the using of grazing and mowing to manage other semi-natural habitats, see “Employ areas of semi-natural habitat for rough grazing (includes salt marsh, lowland heath, bog, fen)”, “Change mowing regime on grassland” and “Manage heathland by cutting”.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of managing wetlands or ponds by grazing or cutting. Two studies were in the Netherlands and one was in Switzerland.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in Switzerland found that fens managed by mowing had a greater species richness of butterflies than fens managed by cattle grazing.

POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the Netherlands found that recently cut fens had fewer large copper eggs than uncut fens.
Survival (2 studies): Two replicated, site comparison studies in the Netherlands found that large copper caterpillar survival was lower in recently cut fens, and fens cut in autumn or winter, than in uncut fens.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
 

Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, site comparison study in 1994–1996 in a fenland in Overijssel, the Netherlands (Pullin 1997) found that three recently cut fen habitats had fewer large copper Lycaena dispar batavus eggs and lower caterpillar survival than two uncut fen habitats. There were fewer large copper eggs on plants in cut fen meadows (0.2–0.3 eggs/plant) than on plants in cut (0.3–0.8 eggs/plant) or uncut (1.8–1.9 eggs/plant) watersides, and the most eggs were found in uncut fen edges (4.2–5.7 eggs/plant). No eggs were found in cut reed fields. In addition, no caterpillars were found in cut fen meadows (from 70 eggs), and caterpillar survival was only marginally higher in cut watersides (11–13 caterpillars from 102 eggs) than in uncut watersides (11–23 caterpillars from 280 eggs) or uncut fen edges (13–31 caterpillars from 425 eggs). Five fenland habitats with different management were surveyed. Fen meadows were cut in patches in August–September; watersides were split into cut (in the preceding year) or uncut areas; fen edges along old ditches were uncut; and reed fields were cut commercially in winter. In August 1994 and 1995, the number of eggs were counted on every water dock Rumex hydrolapathum encountered 1 m either side of 2–5 transects/year (40–200 m long) through each habitat type. In late May 1995 and early June 1996, the number of surviving caterpillars were counted on the same plants.
A replicated, site comparison study in 1996 in 24 montane fens in Switzerland (Wettstein & Schmid 1999) found that fens managed by mowing had more species of butterfly than fens managed by cattle grazing. The species density of butterflies was higher on mown fens (8.9 species/transect) than on grazed fens (7.7 species/transect). Twelve of 23 fens (0.8–15.4 ha) were managed by mowing, and 11 by cattle grazing. From July–August 1996, butterflies were surveyed once on a 10-minute walk along each of three 540-m transects/fen.
A replicated, site comparison study in 1996–1998 in nine fens in Overijssel, the Netherlands (Nicholls & Pullin 2000) found that fens cut in autumn or winter had lower large copper Lycaena dispar batavus caterpillar survival than uncut fens. The overwinter survival of large copper caterpillars in fens cut in autumn or winter (2–3%/year: 5/176 caterpillars found) was lower than in unmanaged fens (15–20%/year: 36/222 caterpillars found). In 1996–1998, four fens within a 3,500-ha lowland bog in the Netherlands were cut in autumn or winter, and five fens were not cut. In 1996–1997, wild large copper eggs were counted on every great water dock Rumex hydrolapathum plant encountered along a transect through each site. Plants were revisited three weeks later, and in April the following year, to record caterpillar survival.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
