2693: Set catch limits or quotas for non-targeted commercial catch
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Fishing catch limits (sometimes called quotas) set a maximum limit on the seasonal or annual quantity of fish that can be caught by a vessel in a given area or fishery and may apply to one or more species. One such type of quota (termed individual transferable quota or ITQ) is used to restrict the overall amount of fish a fishing fleet can catch. As the name suggests, transferable quotas can be bought, sold or leased between vessels. However, another type of quota (termed individual vessel bycatch quota or ITBQ) can be implemented. Unlike ITQs, ITBQs are not transferable and put a limit on the unwanted/discarded proportion of fish a vessel can catch that isn’t retained for market (fish may not be kept for market for a variety of reasons, including the species being of no value and/or target species that are undersized or exceed the quota). They aim to reduce unwanted catches of fish by not only limiting overall fishing mortality, but by also encouraging active avoidance of unwanted catch by fishers that may have to stop fishing once their non-target quota is reached (O’Keefe et al. 2014).
O’Keefe C.E., Cadrin S.X. & Stokesbury D.E. (2014) Evaluating effectiveness of time/area closures, quotas/caps, and fleet communications to reduce fisheries bycatch. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 71, 1286–1297.

Key Messages:

Two studies examined the effects of setting catch limits or quotas for non-targeted commercial fish species on marine fish populations. One review was in the North Atlantic and Pacific Oceans and one study was in the Pacific Ocean (Canada). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (2 STUDIES)

Reduction of unwanted catch (2 studies): One review in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans found that setting catch limits or quotas for non-commercially targeted fish reduced unwanted catch in two of three cases. One before-and-after study in the Pacific Ocean found that catch limits for non-target commercial species reduced the amount of unwanted halibut, but a previous quota system based on the whole catch (individual transferrable quotas) did not.


Supporting Evidence:
A review in 2013 of three areas (bottom and midwater) in the North Atlantic and Pacific Oceans (O'Keefe et al. 2014) reported that commercial fisheries that implemented catch limits or quota caps for non-commercially targeted fish resulted in reduced unwanted catch in two of three cases. Data were not statistically tested. Programmes that used technology to provide near real-time catch information to fishers resulted in reduced unwanted catch or discards in two of three cases compared to no use of real-time technology. Catch limits or quotas were evaluated as having reduced unwanted catch in two of three cases: of Pacific halibut Hippoglossus stenolepis in the British Columbia groundfish (bottom) trawl fishery, Canada; and in the mixed species fisheries in New Zealand. A cap for unwanted yellowtail flounder Limanda ferruginea in the USA scallop Pectinidae fishery was evaluated as having not reduced unwanted flounder catch across all affected regions even though it was successful in some areas (data not reported, see paper for references to original studies). The review summarized peer-reviewed evaluations (see paper for details of original studies) of programmes implementing unwanted catch mitigation techniques, including the setting of catch limits or quotas for unwanted or non-commercially targeted fish catch.
A before-and-after study in 1962–2006 of bottom fishing grounds in the northwest Pacific Ocean off British Columbia, Canada (Edinger & Baek 2015) found that in the 10 years after implementing an individual vessel catch limit (quota) system for unwanted catch (“bycatch”) in a multispecies groundfish fishery, the unwanted catch of Pacific halibut Hippoglossus stenolepis (a prohibited species) was reduced, but a previous quota system limiting the amount of the whole catch (individual transferrable quotas) increased halibut catch. In the period 1996–2006 following the introduction of a “bycatch” quota system for individual vessels in 1996, halibut catches fell by 219% (data reported as statistical model results). Conversely, when individual transferrable catch quotas had been implemented in 1990, it resulted in a 40% increase in unwanted halibut catches (data reported as statistical model results). Authors noted that this increase was due to individual transferrable quotas tending to only consider the conservation of a single species rather than multiple species caught at the same time. Fisheries data from the British Columbia groundfish fishery for the period 1962–2006 were analysed, provided by The International Pacific Halibut Commission and Fisheries and Oceans Canada. The British Columbia Groundfish fishery implemented an individual vessel bycatch quota system in 1996 whereby trawl license holders received a quota representing a percentage of the species-specific total allowable catch.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
