2934: Engage policymakers to make policy changes beneficial to marine and freshwater mammals
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Engaging with and raising awareness amongst policymakers about specific threats to marine and freshwater mammals, and the need for conservation, may result in improved legal protection of mammals and their habitats.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects of engaging policymakers to make changes beneficial to marine and freshwater mammals. The study was in the Catazajá wetlands (Mexico).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Change in human behaviour (1 study): One study in the Catazajá wetlands reported that engaging policymakers resulted in the designation of a protected area for West Indian manatees.


Supporting Evidence:
A study in 2001–2008 in the Catazajá wetlands, northeast Chiapas, Mexico (Rodas-Trejo et al. 2008) reported that engaging policymakers in West Indian manatee Trichechus manatus manatus conservation resulted in the designation of a protected area. Policymakers were engaged in manatee conservation over a seven-year period in 2001–2007. In November 2006, wetlands (41,000 ha) used by West Indian manatees were designated as a protected area by local and regional governments. In February 2008, the area was designated as an internationally important site. In 2001–2007, local government officials, fishers and students were informed about the value of conserving manatees and their habitats. A total of 4,540 participants attended 23 workshops and 80 public talks. Publications on manatee conservation (four posters, five videos, two leaflets, one booklet) were distributed to community government officials and local schools. Local community members assisted researchers in recording manatee sightings and rescuing stranded manatees.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
