2438: Keep livestock in enclosures to reduce predation by mammals to reduce human-wildlife conflict
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Free-ranging livestock may be more vulnerable to attacks by predators than those contained indoors or in enclosures close to farm buildings. Here we consider the effectiveness of such methods of animal husbandry. If successful, this intervention could reduce incentives for carrying out lethal control of predators. See also Exclude wild mammals using ditches, moats, walls or other barricades to reduce human-wildlife conflict.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects of keeping livestock in enclosures to reduce predation by mammals to reduce human-wildlife conflict. This study was in Portugal.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (1 STUDY)

Human-wildlife conflict (1 study): A replicated study in Portugal found fewer wolf attacks on cattle on farms where cattle were confined for at least some of the time compared to those with free-ranging cattle.


Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, site comparison study in 2012–2014 of 68 cattle farms in a mountainous region dominated by agricultural land, forests and shrubs in northern Portugal (Pimenta et al. 2017) found that farms that often kept cattle in barns or enclosures suffered fewer wolf Canis lupus attacks than did farms with free-ranging cattle. The average annual number of wolf attacks was lower on farms that often confined cattle (2.4 attacks/year) than on farms with free-ranging cattle (9.0 attacks/year). Eighteen farms suffered no wolf attacks, 42 had 1–9 wolf attacks and eight had &gt;9 wolf attacks. The study was conducted in an area of approximately 20,000 km2. Semi-structured interviews were conducted in 2013–2014 with 68 cattle farmers reporting high or low levels of wolf-attacks during 2012–2013. Interview responses were used to classify farms as those that often confined cattle within fences or in barns year-round, or those using a free-ranging system, in which animals were rarely confined with fences or in barns (except at night during winter).


Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
