3542: Introduce alternative income sources to replace hunting or harvesting of reptiles
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Introducing appropriate alternative income-generating activities may reduce the reliance of communities on earning money from collecting/hunting and selling wild animals, and in turn reduce the collecting/hunting pressure on wild populations. Studies in this section should ideally directly test the effect of the intervention on wild populations, as well as the income benefits and participation levels within the communities.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects on reptile populations of introducing alternative income sources to replace hunting or harvesting of reptile populations. This study was in St Kitts1.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (1 STUDY)

Human behaviour change (1 study): One before-and-after study in St Kitts1 found that fishers that took jobs on a turtle management project reported that they ceased turtle fishing activity.


Supporting Evidence:
A before-and-after study in 2006–2009 in St Kitts (Stewart et al. 2016) found that offering alternative livelihoods relating to sea turtle management to sea turtle fishers resulted in fishers reporting that they had ceased turtle fishing activity. Fishers that accepted jobs on the turtle management project reported that they had stopped harvesting sea turtles as a result. Prior to this, fishers reported that they caught between 25 and 100 turtles/year. In 2006, an initial survey of seven fishers was carried out that assessed how dependent fishers were on the sea turtles and how many they were capturing. Fishers that expressed interest in a Fishers’ Technician Programme were offered positions on the turtle management project. Those fishers that took up positions on the technician programme subsequently reported on their sea turtle harvesting activities (details of reporting method are unclear).


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
