3709: Plant native species
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Planting vegetation can help to relatively rapidly re-establish habitats after human disturbance. This may benefit reptile populations.
Studies that combine native species planting with other restoration activities are discussed under Whole habitat restoration.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects of planting native species on reptile populations. Both studies were in the USA.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Occupancy/range (1 study): One before-and-after study in the USA found that an area reseeded and replanted with native vegetation was colonized and abandoned at different times by two snake and one lizard species, and one other lizard species may have remained, but in low numbers.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Use (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that grasslands reseeded with both native and non-native grasses were used by Texas horned lizards.


Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, site comparison study in 2001 in grassland in Texas, USA (McIntyre 2003) found that Texas horned lizards Phrynosoma cornutum were present in reseeded native and non-native grassland. Texas horned lizards were observed in one reseeded native grassland plot planted without buffalo grass Buchloe dactyloides (one lizard), in one reseeded native grassland plot planted with buffalo grass (one lizard) and two reseeded non-native grassland plots (one lizard/plot). In July 2001, Texas horned lizards were opportunistically surveyed in 1 km2 plots reseeded with either a native species mix excluding buffalo grass (4 plots), a native species mix including buffalo grass (4 plots), or non-native grasses (weeping lovegrass Eragrostis curvula or Old World bluestem Bothriochloa ischaemum, 7 non-native grass plots), as well as a single plot of unseeded unploughed native grass (16 total plots). Reseeded plots were part of the US Conservation Reserve Program to restore prairie.
A before-and-after study in 1999–2003 of former agricultural land in California, USA (Uptain et al. 2005) found that upland habitat restored by seeding and transplanting native plant species was colonized by California king snakes Lampropeltis getulus californiae, western fence lizards Sceloporus occidentalis and gopher snakes Pituophis catenifer. California king snakes and western fence lizards were observed from two years after restoration took place (in 2001–2003). Gopher snakes were recorded in the year after restoration took place only. Western whiptail lizards Cnemidophorus tigris were recorded before restoration, but not afterwards, although the authors report that they are likely to have persisted in low numbers. In 1999, native plants were introduced to 20 plots (4 ha) in randomized blocks by either seeding or transplanting, with or without surface contouring. Visual encounter surveys (circular plots and transects) and artificial coverboard surveys (4/plot) were undertaken once before restoration in 1999 and at least 12 times thereafter in 2000–2003.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
