3751: Create or restore shrubland 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Loss of shrubland may be due to a range of factors, including too many grazing animals inhibiting regeneration of shrubs, too few grazing animals or fire suppression leading to reversion to woodland, or invasion by non-native species. Shrubland restoration or creation may benefit reptiles associated with the habitat.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects of creating or restoring shrubland on reptile populations. This study was in Mexico.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Mexico found that areas of restored shrubland had similar reptile and amphibian species richness compared to areas that were not restored.

POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Mexico found that areas of restored shrubland had a higher abundance of lizards than areas that were not restored.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, controlled study in 2009–2010 in three sites of dry scrub within a wider urban setting in Mexico City, Mexico (San-José et al. 2013) found that restoring shrubland by planting native species, removing invasive plants and constructing rock piles resulted in similar species richness, but higher abundance of lizards compared to a site with no management. Results were not statistically tested, and the effect of each intervention cannot be separated. Restored sites had a similar number of species (4 species of reptiles and amphibians) as the site with no management (3 species of reptiles and amphibians). Higher numbers of lizards were observed in the two restored sites compared to the site with no management (overall abundances not provided). In 2005–2006, restored sites (0.5 and 0.3 ha) were cleared of rubbish and exotic woody vegetation (dominated by Eucalyptus camaldulensis); replanted with native vegetation; and rock piles were constructed (2–3 m diameter and 1.2 m high). The site without management (0.3 ha) had no vegetation removal or planting or rock piles. Sites were surveyed eight times each by slow, random walks between May 2009–2010.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
