3382: Treat tree/shrub seeds with chemicals before sowing: freshwater wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Acids and bleach may weaken the seed coat, increasing its permeability to water and gases which are essential breaking dormancy and inducing germination (Baskin & Baskin 2014). They may also sterilize seeds, killing fungi that may otherwise reduce germination rates. Hormones are widely used in agriculture and horticulture to stimulate germination and growth (Small & Degenhardt 2018). Other molecules such as nitrates act as signals within plants and may stimulate germination (Alboresi et al. 2005).
To be summarized as evidence for this action, studies must have explicitly compared the performance of treated and untreated seeds. Studies that simply report the performance of treated seeds are not summarized here. Studies do not have to be in flooded/saturated soils, as long as they involve wetland-characteristic species.
Related actions: Soak seeds before sowing; Chill seeds before sowing; Heat seeds before sowing; Expose seeds to light before sowing; Physically damage seeds before sowing.
Alboresi A., Gestin C., Leydecker M.T., Bedu M., Meyer C. & Truong, H.N. (2005) Nitrate, a signal relieving seed dormancy in Arabidopsis. Plant, Cell & Environment, 28, 500–512.
Baskin C.C. & Baskin J.M. (2014) Seeds: Ecology, Biogeography and Evolution of Dormancy and Germination, Second Edition. Academic Press.
Small C.C. & Degenhardt D. (2018) Plant growth regulators for enhancing revegetation success in reclamation: a review. Ecological Engineering, 118, 43–51.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects – on trees/shrubs typical of freshwater wetlands – of treating their seeds with chemicals before sowing. Both studies were in one laboratory in the USA.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE
 
VEGETATION STRUCTURE 
       
OTHER

Germination/emergence (2 studies): Two replicated, controlled studies in a laboratory in the USA found that soaking baldcypress Taxodium distichum seeds in weak sodium hydroxide increased their germination rate. One of the studies found that soaking in ethyl alcohol and/or hydrochloric acid reduced the germination rate. One of the studies found that soaking in stronger sodium hydroxide, or hydrogen peroxide and ethyl alcohol, had no significant effect on the germination rate.
Growth (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in a laboratory in the USA found that soaking baldcypress Taxodium distichum seeds in chemicals before sowing typically had no significant effect on the height of surviving seedlings, 30 days after germination. Soaking in ethyl alcohol, however, reduced seedling height.


Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, controlled study in 2004 in a laboratory in Florida, USA (Liu et al. 2009) found that soaking baldcypress Taxodium distichum seeds in sodium hydroxide NaOH increased their germination rate, but that soaking in hydrochloric acid HCl or ethyl alcohol reduced their germination rate. Seeds soaked in 1% NaOH then water had a higher germination rate (54% germinated) than seeds soaked only in water (47% germinated). Seeds soaked in other chemicals had a lower germination rate than the seeds soaked only in water. This was true for 1% HCl (34% germinated), 95% ethyl alcohol (7% germinated), ethyl alcohol then NaOH (0% germinated), and ethyl alcohol then HCl (7% germinated). After 30 days and in three of four comparisons, there was no significant difference in the height seedlings that had grown from seeds soaked in chemicals (9.3–10.5 cm) or seeds soaked only in water (8.3 cm). In the other comparison, seedlings that had grown from seeds soaked in ethyl alcohol were shorter (4.3 cm) than the seeds soaked only in water. Methods: In August 2004, baldcypress seeds were planted into trays of growing medium. There were three replicates (10 seeds/replicate) for each of six pre-sowing chemical treatments (each involving soaking for 5 min/chemical): NaOH; HCl; ethyl alcohol; ethyl alcohol then NaOH; ethyl alcohol then HCl; or no chemical. All seeds were then soaked in distilled water for 24 h before sowing. All seeds had been stored at 4°C for four months before the experiment started. Germinated seedlings were transplanted to individual pots of growing medium and measured after 30 days.
A replicated, controlled study in 2004–2005 in a laboratory in Florida, USA (Liu et al. 2009) found that soaking baldcypress Taxodium distichum seeds in weak sodium hydroxide NaOH increased their germination rate, but that soaking in stronger NaOH or hydrogen peroxide H2O2 + ethyl alcohol had no significant effect on their germination rate. Seeds soaked in 0.5% NaOH then water had a higher germination rate (45% germinated) than seeds soaked only in water (36% germinated). Seeds soaked in other chemicals had a statistically similar germination rate to seeds soaked only in water. This was true for 2% NaOH (33% germinated), 4% NaOH (36% germinated), 0.03% H2O2 + ethyl alcohol (36% germinated), and 0.3% H2O2 + ethyl alcohol (28% germinated). Methods: In November 2004, baldcypress seeds were planted into trays of growing medium. There were three replicates (12 seeds/replicate) for each of six pre-sowing chemical treatments: 0.5% NaOH for 24 h; 2% NaOH for 24 h; 4% NaOH for 24 h; 0.3% H2O2 + ethyl alcohol for 5 min; 0.03% H2O2 + ethyl alcohol for 5 min; or no chemical. All seeds were then soaked in distilled water for 24 h before sowing. All seeds had been stored at 4°C for four months before the experiment started.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
