1973: Inform local communities about the negative impacts of bat hunting to reduce killing of bats
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Education programmes that emphasize the negative impacts of bat hunting and the role of bats in providing ecosystem services are being implemented in some countries, and may benefit bats (e.g. Entwistle 2001, Trewellha et al. 2005). However, there are many factors that influence human behaviour, and it may be necessary to collaborate with social scientists to design appropriate education programmes (e.g. see Kingston 2016). See also ‘Inform local communities about disease risks from hunting and eating bat meat to reduce killing of bats’.
Entwistle A. (2001) Community-based protection successful for the Pemba flying fox. Oryx, 35, 355–356.
Kingston T. (2016) Cute, creepy, or crispy – How values, attitudes, and norms shape human behavior toward bats. Pages 571–595 in: Voigt C.C. & Kingston T. (eds.) Bats in the Anthropocene: Conservation of Bats in a Changing World. Springer International Publishing, Cham.
Trewhella W.J., Rodriguez-Clark K.M., Corp N., Entwistle A., Garrett S.R.T., Granek E., Lengel K.L., Raboude M.J., Reason P.F. & Sewall B.J. (2005) Environmental education as a component of multidisciplinary conservation programs: lessons from conservation initiatives for critically endangered fruit bats in the western Indian Ocean. Conservation Biology, 19, 75–85.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects of informing local communities about the negative impacts of bat hunting to reduce killing of bats on bat populations. The study was in Ghana.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)         

Behaviour change (1 study): One before-and-after study in Ghana found that after providing education about the ecological roles of bats fewer hunters intended to hunt bats in the future.


Supporting Evidence:
A before-and-after study in 2009–2011 in a rural region of southern Ghana (Kamins et al 2015) found that after education about the negative impacts of bat hunting, fewer hunters intended to hunt bats in the future than before the education was provided. In response to a questionnaire, fewer hunters (2 of 4) stated they intended to hunt bats in the future after they were given education about the negative impacts of bat hunting than before (all 4 of the hunters), although sample sizes were small and the difference was not tested for statistical significance. In 2009–2011, each of four bat hunters was interviewed with the same set of questions before and after a brief education piece was provided including verbal explanations of the important ecological roles of bats.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Bat Conservation
Description: Update 2020
