3707: Develop/implement species recovery plans 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Species recovery plans are documents that set out the actions for species management. Recovery plans are more likely to be effective when they are tailored to the species at risk, revised regularly to ensure that they are up to date, and incorporate evaluation to enable efficient and effective conservation action (Boersma et al. 2001).
Boersma P.D., Kareiva P., Fagan W.F., Clark J.A. & Hoekstra J.M. (2001) How Good Are Endangered Species Recovery Plans? BioScience, 51, 643–649.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects of developing/implementing species recovery plans on reptile populations. This study was in Australia.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (1 STUDY)

Conservation status (1 study): One controlled, before-and-after, paired study in Australia found that the chance of a species’ conservation status improving or being stable was similar for those with a recovery plan (including three reptile species) and those without a plan (including three reptile species).


Supporting Evidence:
A controlled, paired species, before-and-after study in 2010 in Australia (Bottrill et al. 2011) found that species with a recovery plan (including 3 reptile species) were not more likely to have improved conservation status compared to species without a plan (including 3 reptile species). The chance of the status of a species being stable or improving was similar for species with a recovery plan (66%) and without a plan (62%). The evaluation assessed species status of 56 species (including 3 reptile species: striped legless lizard Delma impar, Bellinger River Emydura Emydura macquarii signata, Blue Mountain’s water skink Eulamprus leuraensis) with a recovery plan and 67 threatened species (including 3 reptile species: Flinders Ranges worm-lizard Aprasia pseudopulchella, Mary River turtle Elusor macrurus, Krefft’s tiger snake Notechis scutatus ater) without a recovery plan. All species were listed under the Environment Protection Biodiversity Conservation Act and either had an approved single-species plan or were lacking a federal recovery plan.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
