3895: Use genetically modified crops which produce pesticide to replace conventional pesticide application 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Drift of insecticides with aerial application, such as Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt), has been recorded as far as 3 km downwind, and spraying reduces the abundance and survival of a wide range of butterflies and moths (Scriber 2004). The use of genetically modified crops, which can produce pesticides themselves, reduces the need for chemical applications, and may result in an overall reduction in the harm caused to non-target species, including butterflies and moths (Scriber 2004).
Note that genetically modified plants which produce pesticides are still harmful to butterflies and moths (see Scriber 2004 for examples).
Scriber J.M. (2004) Non-target impacts of forest defoliator management options: Decision for no spraying may have worse impacts on non-target Lepidoptera than Bacillus thuringiensis insecticides. Journal of Insect Conservation, 8, 241–261.

Key Messages:
         

One study evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of using genetically modified crops which produce pesticide to replace conventional pesticide application. This study was in a laboratory.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Survival (1 study): One controlled study in a laboratory found that pollen from genetically modified maize expressing the Bacillus thuringiensis kurstaki (Btk) toxin against European corn borer did not reduce the survival of eastern tiger swallowtail or spicebush swallowtail caterpillars more than pollen from non-genetically modified maize.
Condition (1 study): One controlled study in a laboratory found that pollen from genetically modified maize expressing the Bacillus thuringiensis kurstaki (Btk) toxin against European corn borer did not reduce the growth of eastern tiger swallowtail or spicebush swallowtail caterpillars more than pollen from non-genetically modified maize.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Supporting Evidence:
A controlled study (year not specified) in a laboratory (location not specified) (Scriber 2004) found that pollen from genetically modified maize expressing the Bacillus thuringiensis var. kurstaki (Btk) toxin against European corn borer Ostrinia nubilalis did not reduce the growth and survival of eastern tiger swallowtail Papilio glaucus or spicebush swallowtail P. troilus caterpillars more than pollen from non-genetically modified maize. The growth and survival of both eastern tiger swallowtail and spicebush swallowtail caterpillars exposed to a large quantity of genetically modified pollen (eastern tiger, survival: 83%, growth: 0.15 mg/mg/day; spicebush, survival: 81%, growth: 0.15) were similar to those exposed to the same quantity of non-genetically modified pollen (eastern tiger, survival: 88%, growth: 0.15 mg/mg/day; spicebush, survival: 83%, growth: 0.14 mg/mg/day), but both were lower than caterpillars which were not exposed to any maize pollen (eastern tiger, survival: 100%, growth: 0.30 mg/mg/day; spicebush, survival: 100%, growth: 0.30 mg/mg/day). The growth rates of caterpillars exposed to smaller quantities of genetically modified or non-genetically modified pollen were similar to those exposed to large quantities (data not presented). Forty-two eastern tiger swallowtail and 28 spicebush swallowtail caterpillars were fed tulip tree Liriodendron tulipfera or spicebush Lindera benzoin leaves dusted with either genetically modified or non-genetically modified maize pollen, at both 1% and 10% fresh leaf weight, or with no pollen dusting. Survival and growth rate were measured after 48 hours.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
