3937: Replace non-native species of tree/shrub with native species
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
The conversion of natural habitat to other land uses often leads to the replacement of native vegetation with non-native species. Native trees and shrubs often support a greater abundance and species richness of caterpillars than non-native trees (Clem & Held 2018). Therefore, replacing non-native species with native ones may improve native butterfly and moth populations.
Clem C.S. & Held D.W. (2018) Associational interactions between urban trees: are native neighbors better than non-natives? Environmental Entomology, 47, 881–889.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of replacing non-native species of tree/shrub with native species. This study was in Panama.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in Panama found that established plantations of native trees had a similar species richness of butterflies to plantations of exotic trees, but a greater species richness than old growth forest.

POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in Panama found that established plantations of native trees had a similar abundance of butterflies to plantations of exotic trees, but a higher abundance than old growth forest.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
 

Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, site comparison study in 2014 in 15 tropical forest plantations in Colon Province, Panama (Basset et al. 2017) found that established plantations of native trees had a similar abundance and species richness of butterflies to plantations of exotic trees. In plantations of native trees, both the abundance (17 individuals) and species richness (6 species) of butterflies were similar to plantations of non-native trees (abundance: 5–20 individuals; richness: 1–7 species). However, plantations generally had a higher abundance (16 individuals) and species richness (5 species) of butterflies than old growth forest (abundance: 11 individuals; richness: 4 species). Five established (&gt;20 years old) single species plantations (average size 4.3 ha) of each of three tree species were surveyed: Cedro espino Pachira quinata (native), teak Tectona grandis (non-native) and Terminalia ivorensis (non-native). During 2014, butterflies were surveyed in four months (March: wet season; and May, September, November: all dry season). Each month, 10 surveys were conducted along a 100-m trail in each plantation, and three surveys were conducted along ten 500-m trails in old growth forest.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
