3921: Increase crop diversity across a farm or farmed landscape
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Agricultural landscapes are often homogenous, with the same crops being grown across a large area. Increasing the diversity of crops within a single farm, or across a farmed landscape, may improve the habitat suitability for butterflies and moths by increasing the availability of resources, or making that availability more consistent over time. For example, differences in flowering time or harvest time may increase the permability of the landscape for butterflies and moths, or mean that nectar resources are available for longer across the summer than if only a single crop type was present.
For studies on increasing diversity within a field, see “Plant more than one crop per field (intercropping)”.

Key Messages:
     

Two studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of increasing crop diversity across a farm or farmed landscape. Both studies were in Switzerland.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Richness/diversity (2 studies): Two replicated, site comparison studies in Switzerland found that farms and landscapes with a greater number of habitats or crop types had a similar species richness of butterflies to farms and landscapes with fewer different habitats or crop types.

POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in Switzerland found that farms with a greater number of habitats had a similar abundance of butterflies to farms with fewer different habitats.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, site comparison study in 2009–2011 in 133 mixed farms in the Central Plateau, Switzerland (Stoeckli et al. 2017) found that farms with a greater number of habitat types (including crop types) had a similar abundance and species richness of butterflies to farms with fewer habitat types. Both the abundance and species richness of butterflies on farms with more different habitats (&gt;3/farm) were similar to farms with fewer habitats (&lt;3/farm) (data presented as model results). A total of 133 farms (17–34 ha, 13–91% arable crops) were managed with “Ecological Compensation Areas” under agri-environment schemes. Management included extensive and low-input meadows with reduced fertilizer and later cutting dates, and the presence of trees, hedgerows and wildflower patches, as well as arable crops and pasture. From May–September 2009–2011, butterflies were surveyed six times on 10–38 transects/farm, totalling 2,500 m/farm. Each transect ran diagonally through a single crop or habitat type, with all available crops and habitats represented. All visits to a farm were completed in a single year, and the species richness was summed across all visits. Total abundance of butterflies was calculated from the number recorded in each habitat, and the availability of each habitat across the farm. Habitats on each farm were mapped between May and August.
A replicated, site comparison study in 2010–2014 in 91 agricultural areas in the Swiss Plateau, Switzerland (Zingg et al. 2018) found that landscapes with a higher diversity of crops had a similar species richness of butterflies to landscapes with lower crop diversity. The species richness of butterflies was similar in agricultural areas with 7–12 different crops (11–33 species) and 1–6 crops (12–33 species). Ninety-one mixed farming areas (1 km2) were selected where 1–12 crop types were grown. Butterflies were surveyed seven times along a 2.5-km transect through each 1-km2 area in one of five years (2010–2014).


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
