3874: Re-plant native trees in logged areas 
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Logging of native forest or plantations causes a dramatic change in the structure of the landscape. Planting native trees in logged areas of natural forest may help to speed up the process of succession and redevelopment of the forest structure, while planting native trees in logged plantations may encourage the restoration of native forest in the area. Note that many species of butterfly and moth do well in early successional woodland after disturbance, but these species may represent a different community to those found in established, pristine forest.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of replanting native trees in logged areas. The study was in Ghana.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Richness/diversity (1 study): One site comparison study in Ghana found that nine years after an area was replanted with native trees after logging it had similar species richness but lower diversity for two of three metrics compared to naturally regenerating secondary forest.

POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Supporting Evidence:
A site comparison study in 2007 and 2009 in an area of moist forest in the Central Region, Ghana (Sáfián et al 2011) found that after nine years, an area replanted Species richness was similar  in nine-year-old replanted forest (54), naturally regenerated secondary forest (51) and a clear-cut area (53), all of which had fewer species than primary forest (62). However, using statistical models, replanted forest had lower estimated species richness (66–75) than the clear-cut area (66–75 vs 77–128). Butterfly community diversity was lower in all three diversity metrics in replanted forest than clear-cut or primary forest, and in two of three metrics than secondary forest (data presented as diversity indices). Differences between habitat types were not tested statistically. Butterfly community compositions in the replanted forest, naturally regenerated secondary forest and primary forest were more similar to each other than to the clear-cut area, but replanted forest and naturally regenerated secondary forest community were more similar to each other than to the primary forest (data presented as similarity index results). Four habitat patches were surveyed, all within a 40 ha area and ~250 m apart from each other, on the boundary of Kakum National Park: young forest planted nine years ago with Ceiba pentandra, Chlorophora excelsa, Terminalia ivoriensis and Khaya ivoriensis,  middle-aged naturally regenerated secondary forest, old primary forest and an area which was previously primary forest but was clear cut one year prior to the first surveying year. Patch size was not given. Eight banana-baited traps were established 30 m apart in each of the sampled patches, and operated for 12 consecutive days, three times each in 2007 and 2009. Butterflies were collected from traps daily.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
