3952: Remove tree canopy to reduce pond or waterway shading
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
The edges of ponds and waterways provide open, sunny habitats favoured by many species, including both wetland specialists and more generalist butterflies and moths. However, management of tree growth along waterways may be necessary to prevent the habitat becoming enclosed, leading to increased shading and a loss of important habitat patches.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of removing tree canopy to reduce pond or waterway shading. This study was in the USA.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
 
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Survival (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the USA1 found that removing trees to reduce stream shading reduced the survival of Appalachian brown caterpillars and pupae, but did not affect egg survival.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
 

Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in 2011–2012 in a pine forest in North Carolina, USA (Aschehoug et al. 2015) found that removing trees to reduce stream shading reduced the survival of Appalachian brown Satyrodes appalachia caterpillars and pupae, but did not affect egg survival. In plots where trees were removed, the survival of Appalachian brown eggs (12–36%) was not significantly different to plots where trees remained (56–74%), but the survival of caterpillars and pupae was lower (trees removed: 7%; trees remained: 20%). In plots where trees were removed and artificial dams were installed, both egg (33–42%) and caterpillar and pupal (14%) survival were similar to plots where trees remained and artificial dams were not installed (egg: 56–74%; caterpillars and pupae: 20%). In May 2011, four 30 × 30 m plots in each of four blocks were randomly assigned to four treatments: manual removal of 90% of trees, installation of temporary dams, tree removal and dam installation, and no manipulation. The 0.5-m high dams spanned the downstream edge of their plot. From 15 May–15 June and 7 July–7 August 2012, a potted sedge Carex mitchelliana plant was placed in the centre of each plot. Each plant had a known number of butterfly eggs, laid by caged wild-caught females prior to placement. The number of eggs on each plant which survived after 48 hours was counted. In addition, in each of three arenas/plot (created from polyethylene food drums), centred on mature sedge, five captive-reared caterpillars (first to third instar) were released and the number of emerging adults was counted.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
