311: Provide paths to limit the extent of disturbance
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Studies have shown that visitors keep to paths when they are provided, thereby reducing disturbance to the wider habitat without the need for specific access restrictions (e.g. Pearce-Higgins & Yalden 1997).
Pearce-Higgins, J.W. & Yalden, D.W. (1997) The effect of resurfacing the Pennine Way on recreational use of blanket bog in the Peak District National Park, England. Biological Conservation, 82, 337–343.
 
 

Key Messages:
A before-and-after study from the UK found that two species of wader nested closer to a path, or at higher densities near the path, following resurfacing, which resulted in far fewer people leaving the path.
 

Supporting Evidence:
A before-and-after study from March-July in 1986-1988 and 1996-1998 at a moor and bog site within the Peak District, England (Finney et al. 2005), found that Eurasian golden plovers Pluvialis apricaria avoided a significantly smaller area surrounding a path after it was re-surfaced, compared with before (birds avoided areas up to 200 m from the path before re-surfacing vs. areas 50 m from the path afterwards; birds showed no avoidance on weekdays after re-surfacing). Before resurfacing, up to 30% of walkers left the path, afterwards only 4% left it. The study found no evidence that plover reproduction was adversely affected by disturbance around footpaths. 
A before-and-after study (Pearce-Higgins et al. 2007) using data from the same surveys as in (1) found that dunlin Calidris alpine occupancy within 200 m of the footpath increased by 50% following path re-surfacing in 1994 (35 birds seen before resurfacing vs. 57 afterwards). However, the authors caution that this was not a significant increase, probably due to small sample sizes. The study found no evidence that dunlin reproduction was adversely affected by disturbance around footpaths. 


Synopsis Details:
Title: Bird Conservation
Description: Bird Synopsis
