2390: Use repellent on slug pellets to reduce non-target poisoning
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Poisons used to control slugs may also be ingested by non-target species, such as rodents. Such poisoning can lead to declines in rodent numbers (Shore et al. 1997). Substances that make slug pellets unattractive to small mammals, yet still effective on slugs, may help to reduce small mammal losses
 
Shore R.F., Feber R.E., Firbank L.G., Fishwick S.K., Macdonald D.W. & Nøruma, U. (1997) The impacts of molluscicide pellets on spring and autumn populations of wood mice Apodemus sylvaticus. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, 64, 211–217.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects on mammals of using repellent on slug pellets to reduce non-target poisoning. This study was in the UK.

KEY COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Use (1 study): A replicated, controlled study in the UK found that, at some concentrations, food treated with a bitter substance was consumed less by wood mice but not by bank voles or common shrews.


Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, controlled study (year not stated) in an agricultural area in the UK (Kleinkauf et al. 1999) found that treating food with a bitter substance (Bitrex™; as a trial of its efficacy for deterring toxic slug pellet consumption) reduced consumption by wood mice Apodemus sylvaticus at some concentrations but did not change consumption rates of bank voles Clethrionomys glareolus or common shrews Sorex araneus. Wood mice avoided food treated with Bitrex at 100 ppm and 300 ppm but showed no avoidance at 50 ppm or 500–1,740 ppm (data not presented). Bank voles and common shrews showed no avoidance of food treated with Bitrex at 100 ppm or 300 ppm (data not presented). Wild small mammals were contained within small enclosures. Wood mice and bank voles were offered barley Hordeum vulgare. Common shrews were offered fly pupae. Food was sprayed with the Bitrex solution. Trails ran for eight hours overnight (wood mouse) or six hours night or day (bank vole and common shrew) with treated food only and with choices of treated and untreated food.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
