2362: (CFT) Wetland birds: Exclude grazers (29c)
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:


Key Messages:

One replicated controlled study from the USA found higher bird species richnesses on sites with grazers excluded; as well as ten wetland associated bird species only found on ungrazed sites.
Two replicated studies from riparian habitats the USA (one controlled, one before and after) found that overall bird abundance, or the abundances of some wetland associated species were higher in sites with grazers excluded.
One site comparison study from the USA investigated productivity (nesting success) and found it higher in sites with grazers excluded.
One replicated site comparison from the USA found higher rates of California black rail (Laterallus jamaicensis) occupancy in ungrazed sites


Supporting Evidence:
A before-and-after study from 1986-1990 (Krueper et al. 2003) found that more birds were detected in an area of riparian, mesquite and Chihuahuan desert-scrub in Arizona, USA, after the removal of cattle and the onset of a grazing moratorium in 1988 (average of 221 birds detected/km of transect in 1990 vs. 103 birds/km for 1986). Detections increased for 42 species, 26 significantly, and decreased for 19 species, eight significantly.  Only four species in the study showed similar trends in regional Breeding Bird Surveys.  Insectivores, granivores, midstory species, upperstory species and riparian species were most likely to increase, and migrants tended to show greater increases than residents. Chihuahuan desert-scrub species showed the smallest increases and were most likely to decline, possibly because the Chihuahuan scrub changed the least with the grazing moratorium. Surveys were conducted three times a month, every month over the study period.
A replicated, controlled study in 1991-1994 in semi-arid riparian habitats in Oregon, USA (Dobkin et al. 1998), found that bird species richness and relative abundance were significantly higher on three ungrazed 1.5 ha plots, compared to three grazed 1.5 ha plots (approximately 10-12 species/plot for ungrazed plots vs. 7-10 species/plot for grazed plots). In addition, ten species associated with riparian and wetlands habitats were found only on exclosure plots, and five species associated with uplands habitats only on open plots. Ungrazed plots had not been grazed for 30 years, whilst grazed plots were grazed until 1990. In the final year of study, four years after grazing had been stopped, key wet-meadow species (sora Prozana carolina, Wilson’s phalarope Phalaropus tricolor, green-winged teal Anas crecca, and gadwall A. strepera) were found on open plots. Throughout the study, sedge cover, forb cover and foliage height diversity of herbs were greater within the exclosure; bare ground, litter cover, shrub cover and shrub foliage height diversity were greater on open plots.
In a 1994 site comparison study in Little Valley, Nevada, USA (Ammon & Stacey 1997), the nesting success rates of riparian bird species were found to be lower in an area grazed by cattle than an adjacent area rested from grazing for 30 years (grazed area: 83% of six above-ground nests successful and 67% of 12 ground nests predated; rested area 36% of 14 above-ground nests successful and 43% of seven ground nests predated). Experimental data from placing artificial nests baited with a Japanese quail Coturnix japonica egg and one painted plasticine egg in both areas showed a similar trend (daily survival rates of 55-95% of 120 eggs in grazed area vs. 77-98% of 120 in rested area). The authors suggest that grazing may facilitate nesting predation through changes in predator assemblage or increasing nest detectability.
A replicated site comparison in 2007–2008 in marshes in northeast California, USA, found that California black rails Laterallus jamaicensis were more likely to occupy ungrazed areas, compared to cattle-grazed areas, in unirrigated marshes, but were less likely to occupy ungrazed areas in irrigated marshes. Ungrazed marshes had greater cover of wetland vegetation in one of two years. Birds: The probability of marshes containing California black rails was higher for ungrazed areas, compared to grazed areas, that were not irrigated, but lower for ungrazed areas, compared to grazed areas, that were irrigated (results reported as model coefficients). Methods: Fourteen ungrazed marshes (fenced between 1998–2005) and 20 winter-spring grazed marshes were surveyed for rails up to twice monthly in April–August (2007) or February–October (2008, excluding September). Vegetation was sampled every month in April–July (2007) or March–August (2008). Not all marshes were surveyed for rails or vegetation each year.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Cool Farm Biodiversity
Description: 
