2353: (CFT) Raptors: Exclude grazers (29c)
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:


Key Messages:

Two replicated (one controlled) studies from the USA found higher species richnesses on sites with grazers excluded. Of these one found significant differences for two vertebrate-predating birds: Le Conte’s thrasher, Toxostoma lecontei and loggerhead shrike, Lanius ludovicianus; the other found a significant increase in the abundance of Gray Hawk, Asturina nitida.
One controlled, replicated site comparison study from the USA found that overall bird abundance, and bird species richness were higher in sites with grazers excluded. Vertebrate-predating birds were either recorded only on grazed sites (Red‐tailed Hawk, American Kestrel, Prairie Falcon) or only on exclosure sites (Northern Harrier and Short‐eared Owl).


Supporting Evidence:
A replicated study in 1994-1995 in the Mojave Desert, California, USA (Brooks 1999), found that bird abundance and species richness were higher inside two 2.25 ha sites protected from sheep grazing and off-highway vehicles (OHV) since 1978, compared to adjacent sites that were grazed and driven over by OHVs. Significant differences were observed for sage sparrow Amphispizia belli, Le Conte’s thrasher Toxostoma lecontei, loggerhead shrike Lanius ludovicianus, verdin Auriparus flaviceps and ash-throated flycatcher Myiarchus cinerascens.  The authors suggest the increased abundance of bird species within the protected area is linked to a greater food supply.
A before-and-after study from 1986-1990 (Krueper et al. 2003) found that more birds were detected in an area of riparian, mesquite and Chihuahuan desert-scrub in Arizona, USA, after the removal of cattle and the onset of a grazing moratorium in 1988 (average of 221 birds detected/km of transect in 1990 vs. 103 birds/km for 1986). Detections increased for 42 species, 26 significantly, and decreased for 19 species, eight significantly.  Only four species in the study showed similar trends in regional Breeding Bird Surveys.  Insectivores, granivores, midstory species, upperstory species and riparian species were most likely to increase, and migrants tended to show greater increases than residents. Chihuahuan desert-scrub species showed the smallest increases and were most likely to decline, possibly because the Chihuahuan scrub changed the least with the grazing moratorium. Surveys were conducted three times a month, every month over the study period.
A replicated, controlled study in 1991-1994 in semi-arid riparian habitats in Oregon, USA (Dobkin et al. 1998), found that bird species richness and relative abundance were significantly higher on three ungrazed 1.5 ha plots, compared to three grazed 1.5 ha plots (approximately 10-12 species/plot for ungrazed plots vs. 7-10 species/plot for grazed plots). In addition, ten species associated with riparian and wetlands habitats were found only on exclosure plots, and five species associated with uplands habitats only on open plots. Ungrazed plots had not been grazed for 30 years, whilst grazed plots were grazed until 1990. In the final year of study, four years after grazing had been stopped, key wet-meadow species (sora Prozana carolina, Wilson’s phalarope Phalaropus tricolor, green-winged teal Anas crecca, and gadwall A. strepera) were found on open plots. Throughout the study, sedge cover, forb cover and foliage height diversity of herbs were greater within the exclosure; bare ground, litter cover, shrub cover and shrub foliage height diversity were greater on open plots.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Cool Farm Biodiversity
Description: 
