2517: Translocate mammals away from sites of proposed energy developments
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Mammals may be vulnerable to habitat destruction at sites of developments such as energy generation installations or mines. If permission is granted for such developments to go ahead, translocating mammals away from the site may be a way of attempting to mitigate the effects of the development.
For related studies, see interventions within Species Management- Translocate Mammals.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects of translocating mammals away from sites of proposed energy developments. One study was in Brazil and one was in Australia.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (2 STUDIES)

Behaviour change (2 studies): A study in Brazil found that lesser anteaters translocated away from a hydroelectric development site remained close to release sites while a study in Australia found that at least one out of eight chuditchs translocated from a site to be mined returned to its site of capture.


Supporting Evidence:
A study in 1996–1998 of savanna at a hydroelectric development scheme in Goiás, Brazil (Rodrigues et al. 2001) found that translocated lesser anteaters Tamandua tetradactyla remained close to release sites up to at least nine months after release. Anteaters moved 0.3–2.2 km from release sites during tracking periods. The greatest distances between recorded points in each anteater’s range were 0.3–2.6 km. Eight adult lesser anteaters were moved from an area being flooded for a reservoir and were released at the edge of the reservoir (distances from capture to release sites not stated). They were monitored by radio-tracking, over two weeks each month. Animals were monitored for between four days and nine months and were located between two and thirty times in total, between December 1996 and February 1998.
A study in 2016 in a forest site in Western Australia, Australia (Cannella & Henry 2017) found that following translocation away from an area being cleared for mining, at least one out of eight chuditchs Dasyurus geoffroii returned to its area of capture. Out of eight translocated chuditchs, one was recaptured, 12 days after release, close to the initial capture site. Its recapture site was 13.5 km from the release point and 1 km from the original capture location. Between first capture and recapture, the individual had lost 13% of its body weight but was otherwise in good condition. In January–March 2016, eight chuditchs were live-trapped across four 53–73-ha woodland plots about to be cleared for mining. Chuditchs were marked with PIT-tags and released in a forest area, approximately 14 km away (linear distance). No details are provided about the release procedures or about post-release monitoring.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
