2537: Use reward removal to prevent non-target species from entering traps
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Animals may be trapped for a variety of reasons. In some cases, such as where trapping is aimed at non-native species, a large number of traps might be set across the landscape. If there is a risk of catching non-target species, these will typically be live traps, from which individuals of non-target species can be released. However, trapping of animals usually entails at least some risk of injury to the animal as well as further risks, such as keeping parents away from their young. Furthermore, a trap holding a non-target animal is generally not then available for capturing the target animal until next visited by an operator. Reward removal may be attempted, whereby strong-smelling bait is left in a form or situation where it is unavailable to animals, to consume. The intention is that non-target species will learn not to pursue that smell.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects on mammals of using reward removal to prevent non-target species from entering traps. This study was in the USA.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Behaviour change (1 study): A replicated, controlled study in the USA found that when reward removal was practiced, the rate of San Clemente Island fox entry into traps set for feral cats was reduced.


Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, controlled study in 1992 and 1994 on an island in California, USA (Phillips & Winchell 2011) found that providing inaccessible bait inside a perforated can conditioned San Clemente Island foxes Urocyon littoralis clementae to avoid feral cat Felis catus traps. In the first year, fewer foxes were recaptured in traps with perforated can baits (8% recaught) than with accessible baits (52%). In the second year, fewer foxes were recaptured in traps using perforated can baits (1% recaptured) than those using accessible baits (27%). When bait treatments were switched between areas, recapture rates increased in those then receiving accessible bait and fell in those with perforated cans. Cat capture efficiency remained high throughout trials. Baits were placed in 8–20 cage traps/area on a 146-km2 island. In 1992, perforated can baits were used in two areas and accessible baits were used in three areas. In 1994, two areas received perforated can baits and accessible baits were used in three areas. Treatments were swapped over in these five areas after 41 days. Inaccessible baits were perforated cat food canisters (1992) or perforated plastic canisters containing cat food, tuna, raw hamburger and a fish oil scent (1994). Accessible baits were cat food, tuna and raw hamburger. Baits were used in traps from February through to June–July in 1992 and 1994.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
