2678: Allow only small-scale, traditional (artisanal) fishing
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Artisanal fisheries are the commercial component of small‐scale coastal fisheries mostly practiced using traditional methods. They are particularly important in some areas such as the Mediterranean where they constitute about 80% of the fishing fleet (Marengo et al. 2015). Artisanal fishing uses a large range of gear types and techniques but is typically operated by a single fisher or a pair of fishers. They target a high number of species, but the fishing methods employed are generally low technology and non-destructive. Allowing only artisanal fishing in an area helps to regulate fishing pressure while balancing conservation and socio-economic needs of local communities, many of whom rely on marine resources. Co-management agreements involving the artisanal fishers may also encourage compliance and may be more easily used to adapt the local fishing effort and/or selectivity to avoid overfishing.
Marengo M., Culioli J.M., Santoni M.C., Marchand B. & Durieux D.H. (2015) Comparative analysis of artisanal and recreational fisheries for Dentex dentex in a Marine Protected Area. Fisheries Management and Ecology, 22, 249–260.

Key Messages:

One study examined the effects of allowing only small-scale traditional (artisanal) fishing in an area on marine fish populations. The study was in the Adriatic Sea (Italy).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (1 STUDY)

Commercial catch abundance (1 study): One site comparison study in the Adriatic Sea found that a marine protected area zone allowing only artisanal fishing activity for three years had higher overall commercial catch rates of five of seven species compared to unprotected areas openly fished.


Supporting Evidence:
A site comparison study in 2005–2008 of an area of rocky and sandy seabed in the Adriatic Sea off the southeast coast of Italy (Guidetti et al. 2010) found that the ‘buffer’ zone of a marine protected area fished only by artisanal commercial fishers for three years using trammel nets, resulted in higher catch rates of five of seven commercial fish species compared to unprotected fished areas outside. Catch rates varied between years but were overall higher inside the buffer zone than outside for: striped red mullet Mullus surmuletus (inside: 5–17, outside: 1–3 kg/km net/d ); large-scaled scorpionfish Scorpaena scrofa (inside: 5–7, outside: 0–1 kg/km net/d); peacock wrasse Symphodus tinca (inside: 2–3, outside: 0–1 kg/km net/d); common pandora Pagellus erythrinus (inside: 1–2, outside: 0–1 kg/km net/d) and common dentex Dentex dentex (inside: 1–2, outside: 0–1 kg/km net/d). Common seabream Pagrus pagrus and forkbeard Phycis phycis catches were similar (inside: 0–5, outside: 0–1 kg/km net/d). From January 2005 to July 2008, artisanal commercial fishing catches (exclusively using trammel nets) were monitored inside the buffer zone (1,885 ha, artisanal commercial fishing permitted since 2005 under a co-management protocol with local fishers) and in surrounding no-take zones (352 ha) in the Torre Guaceto Marine Protected Area (all fishing banned in the entire area from 2001–2005). Catch rates of the most important species (those contributing most to the differences between areas) were compared from 217 deployments inside the buffer zone and 66 outside over three years.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
