3084: Control problematic plants (specific intervention unclear): brackish/saline marshes or swamps
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
This section considers studies that have controlled problematic plants, but which do not clearly report the specific intervention(s) used for control so the study cannot be summarized elsewhere in this chapter.
For this section, “vegetation” refers to overall or non-target vegetation. Studies that only report responses of target problematic plants have not been summarized.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of controlling problematic plants in brackish/saline marshes or swamps using unspecified or unclear methods. The study was in the USA.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in salt marshes in the USA found that plots in which common reed Phragmites australis had been controlled 4–10 years previously contained a similar density of plant stems to nearby natural marshes
Individual species abundance (1 study): One study quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species, other than those being controlled. The replicated, site comparison study in salt marshes in the USA found that plots in which common reed Phragmites australis had been controlled 4–10 years previously had similar cover of saltmarsh cordgrass Spartina patens to nearby natural marshes.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in salt marshes in the USA found that plots in which common reed Phragmites australis had been controlled 4–10 years previously contained vegetation of similar height to nearby natural marshes.


Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, site comparison study in 2007–2008 across 16 salt marshes in Connecticut, USA (Elphick et al. 2015) found that plots where common reed Phragmites australis had been controlled had a similar vegetation density, cover of saltmarsh cordgrass Spartina patens and vegetation height to natural marshes. After 4–10 years, plots where common reed had been controlled had 10% common reed cover – greater than the 1% cover in natural marshes. However, other measured variables did not significantly differ between reed-control and natural marshes. This included overall vegetation density (28 vs 35 stems/100 cm2), cover of saltmarsh cordgrass (18 vs 20%), and maximum vegetation height (55 vs 40 cm). Methods: In summer 2007 and 2008, vegetation was surveyed in 26 plots (each 1 ha) spread across 16 salt marshes. In seven plots, interventions to control common reed had been implemented 4–10 years ago. The interventions included cutting and applying herbicide (further details not reported). The other 19 plots contained natural salt marsh vegetation. Vegetation cover was estimated in nine 1-m2 quadrats/plot, stem density in forty-five 100 cm quadrats/plot and vegetation height at 36 points/plot.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
