3954: Install artificial dams in streams to raise water levels
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
In natural wetland habitats in northern temperate regions, streams and rivers are dammed by beavers, reducing the flow of water and creating wetlands and pools which are used by many other species. This rise in water levels may be important for the reproductive cycle of other species, including wetland specialist butterflies and moths. However, in many regions, beavers have been extirpated or reduced to very small populations by hunting, leading to a loss of this important wetland habitat. Where the reintroduction of beavers is unfeasible, installing artificial dams may replicate the rise in water levels associated with wild beavers.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of installing artificial dams in streams to raise water levels. This study was in the USA.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
 
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Survival (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the USA found that installing artificial dams in streams did not increase the survival of Appalachian brown butterfly eggs, caterpillars or pupae.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
 

Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in 2011–2012 in a pine forest in North Carolina, USA (Aschehoug et al. 2015) found that installing artificial dams in headwater streams to raise water levels did not increase the survival of Appalachian brown Satyrodes appalachia eggs, caterpillars or pupae. In plots where dams were installed, the survival of Appalachian brown eggs (23–43%) and caterpillars and pupae (37%) was not significantly different from plots where dams were not installed (eggs: 56–74%; caterpillars and pupae: 20%). In plots where artificial dams were installed and trees were removed, both egg (33–42%) and caterpillar and pupal (14%) survival were also similar to plots where dams were not installed and trees remained (egg: 56–74%; juvenile: 20%). In May 2011, four 30 × 30 m plots in each of four blocks were randomly assigned to four treatments: installation of temporary dams, manual removal of 90% of trees, tree removal and dam installation, and no manipulation. The 0.5-m high dams spanned the downstream edge of their plot. From 15 May–15 June and 7 July–7 August 2012, a potted sedge Carex mitchelliana plant was placed in the centre of each plot. Each plant had a known number of butterfly eggs, laid by caged wild-caught females prior to placement. The number of eggs on each plant which survived after 48 hours was counted. In addition, in each of three arenas/plot (created from polyethylene food drums), centred on mature sedge, five captive-reared caterpillars (first to third instar) were released and the number of emerging adults was counted.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
