3924: Leave unharvested crop headlands within arable fields 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Harvesting crops creates a dramatic change in the farmed landscape, by suddenly and simultaneously removing plants, which may be providing nectar resources to butterflies and moths, from a large area. Even if butterflies and moths are not using the crop itself, harvesting disturbs the structure of the field, and may cause mortality of caterpillars living on other plant species within or around the crop. Leaving unharvested strips, known as headlands, at the edge of fields may provide both shelter and a continued resource availability to butterflies and moths.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects of leaving unharvested crop headlands within arable fields. This study was in France.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, paired, site comparison study in France found that unharvested alfalfa headlands had a greater species richness of butterflies than harvested alfalfa or wheat fields.

POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Abundance (1 study): One replicated, paired, site comparison study in France found that unharvested alfalfa headlands had a higher abundance of butterflies than harvested alfalfa or wheat fields.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, paired, site comparison study in 2009–2010 on 24 farms in Champagne-Ardennes and Haute-Normandie, France (Manil & Chagué 2014) found that unharvested alfalfa Medicago sativa headlands had a higher abundance and species richness of butterflies than harvested alfalfa or wheat Triticum spp. fields. In unharvested strips of alfalfa, the abundance (53 individuals/transect) and species richness (4 species/transect) of butterflies was higher than in harvested alfalfa (abundance: 12–15 individuals/transect; richness: 2–3 species/transect) or in conventional wheat fields (abundance: 3–6 individuals/transect; richness: 1–2 species/transect). See paper for individual species results. On each of 24 farms, one alfalfa field was harvested conventionally 4–5 times/year, one alfalfa field had a rotational 7-m strip left unmown during each harvest, and one winter wheat field was managed conventionally. From May–September 2009–2010, butterflies were surveyed visually five times/year on two 200–400-m transects in each field (15–17 farms surveyed/year).


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
