2600: Modify the roadside environment to reduce collisions by reducing attractiveness of road verges to mammals
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Collisions with vehicles can be a major cause of mortality for wild mammals and, especially where larger mammal species are involved, a cause of injury, death and economic loss for motorists (Conover et al. 1995). A range of interventions can be employed to in an attempt to reduce the animal-vehicle collision rate. One option may be to modify the roadside environment to make it less attractive to mammals. This could involve removing vegetation that provides mammals with feeding or shelter resources, planting vegetation that is unattractive to mammals or removing other roadside features that are known to attract mammals and create accident hotspots.
Conover M.R., Pitt W.C., Kessler K.K., DuBow T.J. & Sanborn W.A. (1995) Review of human injuries, illnesses, and economic losses caused by wildlife in the United States. Wildlife Society Bulletin, 23, 407–414.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects of modifying the roadside environment to reduce collisions by reducing attractiveness of road verges to mammals. This study was in Canada.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

(1 study): A replicated, before-and-after, site comparison study in Canada found that draining roadside salt pools and filling them with rocks reduced the number and duration of moose visits.


Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, before-and-after, site comparison study in 2003–2005 in mixed coniferous and deciduous forest in Québec, Canada (Leblond et al. 2007) found that draining roadside salt pools and filling them with rocks reduced the number and duration of visits by moose Alces alces. There was a lower overall visit rate to salt pools at night after some where drained and filled with rocks (0.2 visits/100 hours) than before (1.5 visits/100 hours). This decline was due to a fall in visits to drained pools with visit rates to undrained pools not changing significantly (see paper for details). Daytime visits did not decrease (after: 0.2/100 hours; before: 0.2–0.5). The average length of time spent at pools decreased (after: 0.02 hours/100 hours; before: 0.11–0.18). Before management, 57% (113/198) of recorded visits were of moose that drank the salty water. After management, no moose drank at drained pools. Moose were monitored at 12 roadside salt pools from mid-May to mid-August in 2003–2005. In autumn 2004, seven salt pools (those near most moose-vehicle collisions) were drained and filled with rocks (10–30 cm diameter) to deter moose. The other five were left untreated. Moose were monitored using movement and heat detectors that triggered a video camera or photo camera with infrared lights.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
