3336: Install physical supports for planted non-woody plants: freshwater wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Planted vegetation could be supported with structures such as stakes or wire mesh. Supports may be used in areas disturbed by wind, waves or human activity to hold vegetation in place whilst it establishes.
Related actions: Use fences or barriers to protected planted areas.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects of installing physical supports for emergent, non-woody plants planted in freshwater wetlands. The study was in the Netherlands.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE
 
VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Biomass/plant (1 study): One replicated, controlled study at the edge of a freshwater lake in the Netherlands found that supporting planted bulrushes Scirpus  with wire mesh had no significant effect on biomass of individual plants after 1–2 years.
Stems/plant (1 study): The same study found that supporting planted bulrushes Scirpus  with wire mesh had no significant effect on number of shoots/plant after 1–2 years.


Supporting Evidence:
A replicated, paired, controlled study in 1989 at the edge of a freshwater lake in the Netherlands (Clevering & van Gulik 1997) found that using wire mesh to support planted bulrushes Scirpus spp. had no significant effect on the number or biomass of bulrush shoots after two months. Bulrush plants in plots with and without support had a similar number of shoots in 12 of 12 comparisons (supported: 2–36 shoots/plant; unsupported: 2–26 shoots/plant) and had similar above-ground biomass in 12 of 12 comparisons (supported: 4–73 g/plant; unsupported: 2–51 g/plant). Methods: In May 1989, bulrushes were transplanted into 96 plots, each 4 m2, at the edge of a tidal freshwater lake. In 48 plots, plants were supported with strips of wire mesh (12 cm holes). There were four supported and four unsupported plots for each combination of two species (lakeshore bulrush Scirpus lacustris ssp. lacustris and saltmarsh bulrush Scirpus maritimus), two water levels (5 or 30 cm average depth) and three planting densities (2–20 plants/m2). All plots were fenced to exclude waterfowl. Bulrush shoots were counted and measured in July 1989. Above-ground dry biomass was estimated from length-mass relationships.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
