550: Provide supplementary food for hummingbirds to increase adult survival
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
We have separated the literature on feeding hummingbirds from other species because they feed on a food source, nectar, very different from most other birds (although see ‘Nectar-feeding songbirds’ later in this chapter).
Successfully providing food for nectar-feeding birds is difficult because they can show strong preferences for different sugar solutions, depending on their sugar concentrations, and which sugar is used. Brown et al. 2008 argue that care must be taken in interpreting the results of preference studies, because different studies measure solution concentration in different ways. For example, they test the preferences of malachite sunbirds Nectarinia famosa (a songbird, not a hummingbird) and found that birds appeared to show a preference for sucrose over hexose, no preference or a preference for hexose over sucrose depending on whether equimolar (i.e. with the same number of sugar moleculars/ml), equiweight (the same weight of sugar/ml) or equicalorific (the same energy content/ml) solutions were used.
 

Key Messages:

 Four studies from the USA found that three species of hummingbird showed preferences for higher concentrations of sucrose (measured in weight/volume), consuming more and visiting feeders more frequently. 
 A study from the USA found that black-chinned hummingbirds Archilochus alexanderi preferentially fed on sugar solutions over artificial sweeteners, and that increasing the viscosity of these solutions (so they appeared more like sugar solutions) did not affect their consumption. 
 Two studies from Mexico (ex situ) and Argentina found that four species showed preferences for sucrose over fructose or glucose when equiweight solutions were compared.  One found that birds also preferentially fed on sucrose over a sucrose-glucose mix, the other found no preference for sucrose over a glucose-fructose mix. 
A controlled study from the USA found that Anna’s hummingbirds Calypte anna showed a preference for red-dyed sugar solutions over five other colours, but only if different colours were presented at the same time.
A replicated study from the USA found that rufous hummingbirds Selasphorous rufus preferentially fed on feeders placed higher, over lower ones.

 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Bird Conservation
Description: Bird Synopsis
