3748: Breed reptiles in captivity: Snakes – Colubrids
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Captive breeding involves taking wild animals into captivity and establishing and maintaining breeding populations. It tends to be undertaken when wild populations become very small or fragmented or when they are declining rapidly. Captive populations can be maintained while threats in the wild are reduced or removed and can provide an insurance policy against catastrophe in the wild. Captive breeding also potentially provides a method of increasing reproductive output beyond what would be possible in the wild. However, captive breeding can result in problems associated with inbreeding depression, removal of natural selection and adaptation to captive conditions. The aim is usually to release captive-bred animals back to natural habitats, either to original sites once conditions are suitable, to reintroduce species to sites that were occupied in the past or to introduce species to new sites. Some captive populations may also be used for research to benefit wild populations.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians. See here for other species groups.
For studies that investigate the effectiveness of releasing captive-bred reptiles see Release captive-bred reptiles into the wild.

Key Messages:

Eighteen studies evaluated the effects of breeding colubrid snakes in captivity. Ten studies were in the USA, two were the UK, two were in unknown locations and one was in each of Costa Rica, Taiwan, India and Australia.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (18 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (18 studies): Seventeen studies in the USA, Costa Rica, the UK, Taiwan, Australia, India and unknown locations reported that 1–2 female colubrid snakes produced 1–12 clutches of 3–16 eggs. Ten of those studies reported hatching success of 67–100%, two reported hatching success of 25% and two reported that hatching success varied from 0–75%. Two of the studies reported that at least 18–20 eggs hatched successfully. One study also found that captive-bred offspring produced two clutches of 3–4 eggs and all hatched successfully. One study in the USA reported that three female San Francisco garter snakes produced broods of 9–35 young.
Survival (5 studies): Five studies in the USA and the UK found that 2–20 captive-bred snakes survived for at least 1–3 months and 2–3 years in captivity, and that from six broods of 9–35 captive-bred San Francisco garter snakes, six young died within four months of birth.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
