3526: Diversify ground vegetation and canopy structure in the habitat around woody crops
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Agricultural intensification methods of large area woody crops (e.g. olives, almonds, coffee) has led to an increase in bare ground (through increased tilling or herbicide) and lack of overstorey surrounding the crop trees. This loss of soil, herbaceous covering and canopy layers has been implicated in losses of wildlife diversity in agricultural systems.
For example, coffee is a small tree or shrub that naturally grows in the forest understory and may be grown commercially under trees that provide shade. In the 1970s, sun-tolerant coffee plants were developed in response to fungal diseases and many plantations removed all canopy trees. These high-yield cultivation practices are considered unsustainable and many coffee plantations, are switching to shade-grown varieties.
Diversifying the habitats where woody crops are grown with respect to both ground and canopy vegetation may increase available habitat for reptile communities within these agricultural systems.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects of diversifying ground vegetation and canopy structure in the habitat around woody crops on reptile populations. One study was in Puerto Rico and the other was in Spain.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, paired, site comparison study in Spain found that olive groves with natural ground cover had higher reptile species richness and diversity than those with bare ground, but groves planted with a single species as ground cover had similar richness and diversity as those with bare ground.

POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Abundance (2 studies): One replicated, site comparison study in Puerto Rico found that two of three lizard species were less abundant in shade-grown coffee plantations than in sun-grown plantations. One replicated, paired, site comparison study in Spain found that olive groves with ground cover had more reptiles than groves with bare ground.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
