2443: Release translocated/captive-bred mammals to areas outside historical range
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Endangered species are sometimes translocated from other areas or bred in captivity for release into their former range. Sometimes, though, the former range remains unsuitable for the species, for example through presence of an invasive predator. In such cases, releases to sites outside the former range may be considered, if these potentially offer better conditions for persistence of the species.

Key Messages:

Seven studies evaluated the effects of releasing translocated or captive-bred mammals to areas outside their historical range. Three studies were in Australia, one study was in each of Kenya, France and South Africa, and one was a review of studies in Andorra, Spain and France.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (7 STUDIES)

Abundance (5 studies): Three of four studies in Kenya, Australia, France, and South Africa found that after translocating mammals to areas outside their historical range, populations increased for Alpine marmots, most of 22 herbivorous species and bridled nailtail wallabies (including captive and enclosure bred animals). A study in Kenya found that a population of translocated roan persisted for more than six years but did not increase. A review of studies in Andorra, Spain and France found that following translocation to areas outside their native range, alpine marmots had similar densities and family group sizes to those of populations in their native range.
Reproductive success (1 study): A study in Kenya found that a population of roan translocated into an area outside their native range persisted and bred for more than six years.
Survival (3 studies): A study in Australia found that captive-bred, translocated and enclosure born bridled nailtail wallabies released into areas outside their historical range had annual survival rates of 40–88% over four years. A study in Australia found that most captive-bred Tasmanian devils released into an area outside their native range survived over four months. A study in Australia found that half the captive-bred and wild-caught translocated eastern barred bandicoots released to a red fox-free island outside their historical range survived for at least two months.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
