3745: Breed reptiles in captivity: Sea turtles
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Captive breeding involves taking wild animals into captivity and establishing and maintaining breeding populations. It tends to be undertaken when wild populations become very small or fragmented or when they are declining rapidly. Captive populations can be maintained while threats in the wild are reduced or removed and can provide an insurance policy against catastrophe in the wild. Captive breeding also potentially provides a method of increasing reproductive output beyond what would be possible in the wild. However, captive breeding can result in problems associated with inbreeding depression, removal of natural selection and adaptation to captive conditions. The aim is usually to release captive-bred animals back to natural habitats, either to original sites once conditions are suitable, to reintroduce species to sites that were occupied in the past or to introduce species to new sites. Some captive populations may also be used for research to benefit wild populations.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians. See here for other species groups.
For studies that investigate the effectiveness of releasing captive-bred reptiles see Release captive-bred reptiles into the wild.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects of breeding sea turtles in captivity. One study was in the Cayman Islands, Costa Rica, Surinam and Ascension Island and one was in Japan.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (2 studies): One replicated, controlled study in the Cayman Islands, Costa Rica, Surinam and Ascension Island found that artificially incubated green turtle eggs that were laid in captivity had lower hatchling success than those laid in the wild and artificially incubated. One study in Japan reported that hatching success of eggs produced by one female black turtle in captivity was 12%.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
