2823: Install exclusion and/or escape devices for mammals on fishing nets
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Marine and freshwater mammals may become trapped or entangled in fishing nets, such as trawl nets. Exclusion devices, such as rigid or flexible grids, are designed to prevent access to mammals while allowing the target species to pass through into the narrow end (‘cod-end’) of the net. Escape holes may be installed in the top or bottom of the net in combination with exclusion devices to allow mammals to exit. However, exclusion devices may cause injury or distress to mammals and it is important to assess the survival of animals after escape (Hamilton & Baker 2015).
Hamilton S. & Baker G.B. (2015) Review of research and assessments on the efficacy of sea lion exclusion devices in reducing the incidental mortality of New Zealand sea lions Phocarctos hookeri in the Auckland Islands squid trawl fishery. Fisheries Research, 161, 200–206.

Key Messages:

Seven studies evaluated the effects on marine mammals of installing exclusion and/or escape devices on fishing nets. Four studies were in the Indian Ocean (Australia, Tasmania) and/or Tasman Sea (Tasmania) and three studies were in the South Atlantic Ocean (South Georgia).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Survival (2 studies): One study in the Indian Ocean found that less than one third of common bottlenose dolphins exited escape hatches on trawl nets alive. One replicated study in the Tasman Sea and Indian Ocean found that fewer fur seals died in exclusion devices with large escape openings than in those with small openings.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (5 STUDIES)

Reduction in entanglements/unwanted catch (5 studies): Three studies (including two controlled studies) in the South Atlantic Ocean and Indian Ocean found that installing exclusion and/or escape devices on trawl nets reduced the number of trapped or entangled Antarctic fur seals and common bottlenose dolphins. One before-and-after study in the Indian Ocean found that installing exclusion and escape devices on trawl nets reduced common bottlenose dolphin entanglements for three of four fishing vessels. One study in the South Atlantic Ocean found that modifying an exclusion and escape device by enlarging and relocating the escape panel resulted in fewer Antarctic fur seal entanglements.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
