1539: Limit time that researchers/tourists are allowed to spend with habituated animals
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
This intervention aims to prevent the spread of viral and bacterial diseases from humans to primates and can be implemented in situations where humans regularly come into close contact with primates, such as when researchers or tourists observe habituated primates in their natural habitat. Another argument for limiting human-primate interactions is that regular contact with humans may influence the behaviour of primates. For example, Riedler et al. (2010) could show that Sumatran orangutans Pongo abelii that were allowed to spend only a limited amount of time with the caretakers, acted more like wild orangutans after release than individuals that had regular and close contact to them.
            Other means of preventing the spread of bacterial and viral diseases from researchers/tourists/managers to primates is discussed under ‘Wear face-masks to avoid transmission of viral and bacterial diseases to primates’, ‘Keep safety distance to habituated animals’, ‘Implement quarantine for people arriving at, and leaving the site’, ‘Ensure that researchers/tourists are up-to-date with vaccinations and healthy’, ‘Regularly disinfect clothes, boots etc.’, and ‘Wear gloves when handling primate food, tool items, etc.’.
 
Riedler B., Millesi E. & Pratje P.H. (2010) Adaption to forest life during the reintroduction process of immature Pongo abelii. International Journal of Primatology, 31, 647–663.

Key Messages:

One controlled study in Indonesia found that reintroduced Sumatran orangutans that spent limited time with caretakers acted more similar to wild orangutans than orangutans that spend more time with caretakers, alongside other interventions.
One before-and-after study in Rwanda, Uganda and the Democratic Republic of Congo found that numbers of mountain gorillas increased by 168% over 41 years while being visited by researchers and visitors during a restricted amount of time, alongside other interventions.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Primate Conservation
Description: Primate Synopsis
