3933: Replant native vegetation 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
The conversion of natural habitat to other land uses leads to the loss of native vegetation. Butterflies and moths often have specific host plant requirements, meaning that if their host species is lost from a site, the population will not be able to survive. This action includes studies testing the effect of specifically planting butterfly and moth host species, as well as planting other native vegetation which may benefit butterflies and moths (Fuentes-Montemayor et al. 2015). Caterpillar growth and survival can differ between naturally occurring host plants species (Pocius et al. 2017), so the choice of host species for planting may be important. This action includes tests of different methods of replanting (e.g. sowing vs plug planting, or the effect of patch size) as well as the effectiveness of replanting overall, and may be conducted at a small scale, or as large-scale habitat restoration where planting is the only action.
For studies on specifically replacing non-native plant species with native species, see “Replace non-native species of tree/shrub with native species”. For studies on the restoration of specific habitats by either multiple actions (which may include planting) or where the specific action is not clear, see “Restore or create forest or woodland”, “Restore or create grassland/savannas”, “Restore or create heathland/shrubland”, “Restore or create peatland” and “Restore or create wetlands and floodplains”.
Fuentes-Montemayor E., Peredo-Alvarez V.M., Watts K. & Park K.J. (2015) Are woodland creation schemes providing suitable resources for biodiversity? Woodland moths as a case study. Biodiversity and Conservation, 24, 3049–3070.
Pocius V.M., Debinski D.M., Pleasants J.M., Bidne K.G., Hellmich R.L. & Brower L.P. (2017) Milkweed Matters: Monarch Butterfly (Lepidoptera: Nymphalidae) Survival and Development on Nine Midwestern Milkweed Species. Environmental Entomology, 46, 1098–1105.

Key Messages:

Eleven studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of replanting native vegetation. Five studies were in the USA, two were in New Zealand, and one was in each of Switzerland, Mexico, Ecuador and Brazil.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (5 STUDIES)

Community composition (3 studies): One replicated, site comparison study in Ecuador found that native trees planted within recently abandoned pasture and secondary shrubland had a similar community composition of butterflies and moths after 7–8 years, but a subset of communities found on native trees planted within pine plantations, or on saplings regenerating naturally within pristine forest. One replicated, site comparison study in Brazil found that 12–14-year-old replanted and naturally regenerating forests had a different butterfly community to both grazed pasture and remnant forest. One site comparison study in Mexico found that a replanted forest had a different community composition of caterpillars to a naturally regenerating forest.
Richness/diversity (5 studies): Four of five site comparison studies (including four replicated studies) in New Zealand, Mexico, Ecuador, Brazil and the USA found that replanted native shrubs, grasses, non-woody broadleaved plants (forbs) and trees had a similar species richness or diversity of butterflies, caterpillars and flower-visiting insects (including butterflies and moths) to vineyards, pasture, naturally regenerating and remnant forests, and remnant prairies. However, one of these studies also found that the species richness of butterflies in replanted native shrubs and grasslands was lower than in remnant native habitat. The fifth study found that, after 7–8 years, native trees planted in pine plantations had a greater species richness of butterflies and moths than trees planted in recently abandoned pasture, but both had a lower species richness than naturally regenerating saplings within pristine forest.

POPULATION RESPONSE (6 STUDIES)

Abundance (5 studies): Four of five site comparison studies (including four replicated studies) in New Zealand, Mexico and the USA found that replanted native shrubs, grasses, non-woody broadleaved plants (forbs), trees and translocated bamboo rush had a similar abundance of butterflies, caterpillars and flower-visiting insects (including butterflies and moths), and density of Fred the thread moth caterpillars to vineyards, pasture, naturally regenerating forest, remnant prairies and undisturbed bogs. However, one of these studies also found that replanted native shrubs and grasses had a lower abundance of butterflies than remnant native habitat. The fifth study found that common milkweed planted in meadows had fewer monarch butterfly eggs than milkweed planted in private gardens.
Survival (2 studies): Two replicated studies (including one randomized, controlled study and one site comparison study) in the USA found that the survival of common sooty winged skipper and monarch butterfly eggs and caterpillars was similar on planted patches of lamb’s-quarters of different sizes, and on common milkweed planted in meadows or private gardens.
Condition (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in New Zealand found that Fred the thread moth caterpillars in translocated bamboo rush plants were a similar size to caterpillars in undisturbed bogs.

BEHAVIOUR (3 STUDIES)

Use (3 studies): Three studies in the USA and Switzerland reported that planted patches of silver lupine, prairie violet and bladder senna were used by wild mission blue and Iolas blue butterflies, and translocated regal fritillaries, for at least three or 4–10 years after planting.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
