3472: Transplant or seed organisms onto intertidal artificial structures
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Definition: ‘Transplanting or seeding species’ includes actions taken to attach live organisms at any life stage onto structures, with the aim of generating self-sustaining populations.
Natural intertidal rocky habitats tend to support many more species than do artificial structures (Moschella et al. 2005). Species can be transplanted or seeded directly onto structures with the aim of enhancing their biodiversity. The choice of species to transplant or seed depends on overarching management objectives. There may be value in transplanting rare, threatened, or commercially-valuable species to create artificial surrogate habitats for localized populations. Alternatively, keystone species such as primary producers, grazers, habitat-providers and water-quality regulators may be of interest to create productive and well-regulated artificial ecosystems. Species common to natural reefs may be the focus if, for example, larvae/spores cannot disperse far enough or hydrographic barriers (currents/tides) prevent recruitment, or to pre-empt potential non-native species invasions on new substrates.
When planning transplanting or seeding interventions, the method and timing of intervention and the suitability of the receiving environment should be carefully considered, as these factors may impact the likelihood of success. It is crucial to understand the reasons for a species’ absence in the first place. If, for example, a species has declined due to poor water quality and there has been no intervening improvement, there can be little expectation of successful recovery following transplantation or seeding (Stevenson et al. 1993). Similarly, species that naturally occur in wave-sheltered habitats should not be expected to survive and thrive on wave-exposed structures (Jonsson et al. 2006). Biological factors such as predation pressure, competition and food availability may also affect outcomes and should be understood prior to carrying out the intervention (Gianni et al. 2018).
There are bodies of literature describing transplanting or seeding species into natural or artificial intertidal habitats to investigate ecological processes and interactions (e.g. Dudgeon & Petraitis 2005; Iveša et al. 2010; Wilkie et al. 2012), for restoration in natural habitats (e.g. Vanderklift et al. 2020) and for artificial reefs (e.g. Walles et al. 2016). These studies are not included in this synopsis, which focusses on in situ conservation actions to enhance the biodiversity of structures that are engineered to fulfil a primary function other than providing artificial habitats.
Dudgeon S. & Petraitis P.S. (2005) First year demography of the foundation species, Ascophyllum nodosum, and its community implications. Oikos, 109, 405–415.
Gianni F., Bartolini F., Airoldi L. & Mangialajo L. (2018) Reduction of herbivorous fish pressure can facilitate focal algal species forestation on artificial structures, Marine Environmental Research, 138, 102–109.
Iveša L., Chapman M.G., Underwood A.J. & Murphy R.J. (2010) Differential patterns of distribution of limpets on intertidal seawalls: experimental investigation of the roles of recruitment, survival and competition. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 407, 55–69.
Jonsson P.R., Granhag L., Moschella P.S., Åberg P., Hawkins S.J. & Thompson R.C. (2006) Interactions between wave action and grazing control the distribution of intertidal macroalgae. Ecology, 87, 1169–1178.
Moschella P.S., Abbiati M., Åberg P., Airoldi L., Anderson J.M., Bacchiocchi F., Bulleri F., Dinesen G.E., Frost M., Gacia E., Granhag L., Jonsson P.R., Satta M.P., Sundelöf A., Thompson R.C. & Hawkins S.J. (2005) Low-crested coastal defence structures as artificial habitats for marine life: using ecological criteria in design. Coastal Engineering, 52, 1053–1071.
Stevenson J.C., Staver L.W. & Staver K.W. (1993) Water quality associated with survival of submersed aquatic vegetation along an estuarine gradient. Estuaries, 16, 346–361.
Venderklift M.A., Doropoulos C., Gorman D., Leal I., Minne A.J.P., Statton J., Steven A.D.L. & Wernberg T. (2020) Using propagules to restore coastal marine ecosystems. Frontiers in Marine Science, 7, 724.
Walles B., Troost K., van den Ende D., Nieuwhof S., Smaal A.C. & Ysebaert T. (2016) From artificial structures to self-sustaining oyster reefs. Journal of Sea Research, 108, 1–9.
Wilkie E.M., Bishop M.J. & O’Connor W.A. (2012) Are native Saccostrea glomerata and invasive Crassostrea gigas oysters habitat equivalents for epibenthic communities in south-eastern Australia? Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology, 420–421, 16–25.

Key Messages:

Ten studies examined the effects of transplanting or seeding species onto intertidal artificial structures on the biodiversity of those structures. Seven studies were in estuaries in southeast Australia and Hong Kong, two were on island coastlines in the Singapore Strait and one was in a port and on an open coastline in southeast Spain.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (5 STUDIES)

Overall community composition (3 studies): Three replicated, randomized, controlled studies in Hong Kong and Australia reported that oysters transplanted onto intertidal artificial structures supported macroalgae, mobile invertebrate, non-mobile invertebrate and fish species that were absent from on and around structure surfaces without transplanted oysters.
Overall richness/diversity (3 studies): Three replicated, randomized, controlled studies in Hong Kong and Australia found that transplanting oysters onto intertidal artificial structures had mixed effects on the combined macroalgae and invertebrate species richness and/or diversity on structure surfaces, depending on the site and/or the presence and size of grooves and small ridges or ledges on surfaces.
Invertebrate richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in Australia found that transplanting oysters onto intertidal artificial structures increased the mobile invertebrate species richness on structure surfaces.
Fish richness/diversity (3 studies): Two of three replicated, randomized studies (including two controlled studies) in Australia found that transplanting oysters and/or coralline algae onto intertidal artificial structures did not increase the fish species richness on and around structure surfaces. One found mixed effects of transplanting oysters, depending on the presence and size of grooves and small ridges on surfaces and the site.

POPULATION RESPONSE (10 STUDIES)

Overall abundance (2 studies): One of two replicated, randomized, controlled studies in Australia found that transplanting oysters onto intertidal artificial structures did not increase the combined macroalgae and invertebrate abundance on structure surfaces. One study found mixed effects depending on the presence and size of grooves and small ridges/ledges on structure surfaces.
Invertebrate abundance (3 studies): Two of three replicated, randomized, controlled studies in Hong Kong and Australia found that transplanting oysters onto intertidal artificial structures had mixed effects on the mobile invertebrate abundance on structure surfaces, depending on the presence of grooves and small ridges or ledges on surfaces and/or the site. One of the studies also found that transplanting oysters increased the non-mobile invertebrate and oyster recruit abundance and decreased barnacle abundance. One found increased oyster and mobile invertebrate abundance.
Fish abundance (3 studies): Two of three replicated, randomized studies (including two controlled studies) in Australia found that transplanting oysters and/or coralline algae onto intertidal artificial structures did not increase the fish abundance on and around structure surfaces. One found that fish abundance around transplanted oysters was similar regardless of the presence and size of grooves and small ridges on structure surfaces.
Algal survival (1 study): One replicated study in Singapore found that macroalgae transplanted onto an intertidal artificial structure were more likely to survive at mid- and highshore than at lowshore.
Invertebrate survival (8 studies): Six of eight studies (including six replicated, three randomized and two controlled studies) in Australia, Spain, Singapore and Hong Kong reported that the survival of mobile invertebrates (seasnails, starfish and/or urchins and anemones) or non-mobile invertebrates (limpets, corals and sponges or oysters) transplanted onto intertidal artificial structures varied depending on the species, site, and/or the presence and size of grooves and small ridges or ledges on structure surfaces. One of the studies found that oyster survival was higher when transplanted into grooves compared with on ridges, while one found that survival in grooves and on ledges varied depending on the site. Two studies simply reported that a proportion of transplanted oysters survived.
Algal condition (1 study): One replicated study in Singapore found that the growth of macroalgae transplanted onto an intertidal artificial structure was similar at lowshore, midshore and highshore.
Invertebrate condition (2 studies): One study in Singapore reported that the growth of corals and sponges transplanted onto an intertidal artificial structure varied depending on the species. One replicated study in Spain simply reported that transplanted limpets grew.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Fish behaviour change (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in Australia found that transplanting oysters and/or coralline algae onto intertidal artificial structures did not increase the time fishes spent interacting with structure surfaces or the number of bites they took, but that benthic fishes took more bites from surfaces with transplanted oysters than from those with transplanted algae and oysters together. These results were true regardless of whether there were grooves and small ridges on structure surfaces.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Biodiversity of Marine Artificial Structures
Description: Enhancing biodiversity of marine artificial structures synopsis
