3740: Rehabilitate and release injured or accidentally caught individuals: Sea turtles
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Reptiles that are injured, sick or found in a weak condition are sometimes taken in by wildlife rehabilitators, to be treated and released back into the wild. Animals may be injured or weakened due to direct interactions with human threats, for example entanglement in fishing gear, or due to natural threats such as extremes of weather caused by climate change (for example sea turtles may become ‘cold-shocked’ due to sudden severe cold weather). Often rehabilitation is carried out more for animal welfare reasons than for species conservation. However, for rare species it may be essential to preserve populations and release of such animals may provide opportunities for choosing where to augment populations. The success of such programmes can be difficult to judge without benchmark data for survival of wild-reared reptiles. It is also important to note that some of the studies summarized below have small sample sizes, and that unsuccessful attempts are less likely to have been reported.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians. See here for: Tortoises, terrapins, side-necked & softshell turtles; Snakes & lizards; Crocodilians or Tuatara.
For studies evaluating the effect of releasing reptiles that were accidentally caught in fishing gear, see Threat: Biological resource use – Establish handling and release procedures for accidentally captured or entangled (‘bycatch’) reptiles and Release accidentally caught (‘bycatch’) reptiles.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects of rehabilitating and releasing injured or accidentally caught sea turtles on their populations. Two studies were in the USA and one was in each of the Philippines and the western Mediterranean.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (4 STUDIES)

Survival (4 studies): One study in the Philippines and one controlled study in the western Mediterranean found that of 79 rehabilitated sea turtles two were found dead and two alive within 1–5 months of release, and six rehabilitated loggerhead turtles survived for at least five months following release. Two studies in the USA found that around one third of stranded sea turtles and 96% of sea turtles caught in fishing gear could be rehabilitated and released. One study also found that the chance of surviving the rehabilitation process varied with species.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Behaviour change (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the western Mediterranean found that six rehabilitated loggerhead turtles showed similar behaviour to wild caught turtles across 46 of 54 comparisons.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
