3308: Add below-ground organic matter before/after planting non-woody plants: freshwater wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Trade off between benefit and harms
Background information and definitions:
This section involves adding organic matter (i.e. remains or waste products of living organisms) below the ground surface (i.e. by mixing it into the sediment, or placing it into holes) to areas planted with marsh or swamp vegetation.
Organic matter could increase the initial survival and/or growth rate of introduced plants, helping them to establish. Organic matter directly supplies nutrients to growing plants, supplies carbon and energy to soil organisms (which can indirectly increase nutrient availability), helps bind the soil together, retains water during dry periods, and mediates soil temperature (Donahue et al. 1983; Weil & Brady 2016). However, the soil organic matter content of wetland soils may be reduced by disturbance. For example, drainage allows oxygen into the soil, whilst reprofiling removes surface layers rich in organic matter (Bruland et al. 2006). Substances than can be used to add organic matter to wetland soils include compost, sewage sludge, wood chips and seaweed extract.
Note that many studies testing this action do not separate the effects of adding organic matter and disturbing the soil/sediment. We have included such studies, as well as those that do separate the effects of these actions with appropriate controls.
Related actions: Add below-ground organic matter, other than to complement planting; Add inorganic fertilizer before/after planting; Add surface mulch to complement planting.
Bruland G.L., Richardson C.J. & Whalen S.C. (2006) Spatial variability of denitrification potential and related soil properties in created, restored, and paired natural wetlands. Wetlands, 26, 1042–1056.
Donahue R.L., Shickluna J.C. & Robertson L.S. (1983) Soils: An Introduction to Soils and Plant Growth, Fifth Edition. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA.
Weil R.R. & Brady N.C. (2016) The Nature and Properties of Soils, Fifteenth Edition. Pearson, USA.

Key Messages:

Seven studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of adding below-ground organic matter to freshwater wetlands planted with emergent, non-woody plants. All seven studies were in the USA. Two of the studies were in a greenhouse.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated study of marshes alongside a stream in the USA found that adding compost before planting wetland herbs typically reduced overall plant species richness over the following three growing seasons. Richness was negatively related to the amount of soil organic matter in plots.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated study of marshes alongside a stream in the USA found that adding compost before planting wetland herbs had no significant effect on total vegetation biomass after three growing seasons. Biomass was not significantly related to the amount of soil organic matter in plots.
Characteristic plant abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in an experimental wet basin in the USA found that adding sawdust to plots before sowing a mixture of target sedge meadow species had no significant effect on the density of target species overall or target grass-like species. Adding sawdust sometimes affected the density of target forbs, depending on the presence/diversity of a nurse crop.
Individual species abundance (2 studies): Two replicated, randomized, paired, controlled studies in wetlands in the USA quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. One study found that incorporating woodchips into soil mounds before planting tussock sedge Carex stricta reduced total tussock sedge cover after two growing seasons. The other study reported varying effects of sawdust addition on the abundance of individual plant species, depending on factors such as the species and presence/diversity of a nurse crop.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Individual plant size (4 studies): Three replicated, controlled studies (one also paired) in the USA found that mixing compost into the substrate before planting tussock sedge Carex stricta seedlings typically increased the biomass and/or number of shoots they developed over 2–3 months. However, in one of the studies, compost typically had no significant effect on top of other soil amendments. One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in a wetland in the USA found that incorporating woodchips into soil mounds had no significant effect on the biomass of planted tussock sedge Carex stricta, over two growing seasons.

OTHER

Germination/emergence (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in an experimental wet basin in the USA found that seeds of mixed sedge meadow species had a similar germination rate, over 16 weeks after sowing, in plots with or without added sawdust.
Survival (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in an excavated wetland in the USA found that planted lurid sedge Carex lurida tubers had a higher survival rate, after one year, in plots that had been amended with leaf litter than in unamended plots. One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in a wetland in the USA found that incorporating woodchips into soil mounds increased survival of planted tussock sedge Carex stricta in a drier area, but reduced its survival in a wetter area.
Growth (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in a wetland in the USA found that incorporating woodchips into soil mounds had no significant effect on the growth rate of planted tussock sedge Carex stricta, over two growing seasons.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
