3868: Harvest groups of trees or use thinning instead of clearcutting 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Harvesting of timber within forests can be carried out by clearcutting sites or by various methods of harvesting a proportion of trees. Forests naturally undergo disturbances such as storms and lightning that can create open patches. Similarly, group selection harvesting and thinning are harvest methods designed to reduce the density of trees within a forest, without removing substantial areas of canopy cover, and may create a mix of different habitats which suit different species of butterflies and moths.
Note that by thinning, rather than felling a whole forest, larger areas would need to be managed in order to achieve the same timber harvest, though some degree of forest cover can be retained over that area.
For other options for harvesting timber, see “Use selective or reduced impact logging instead of conventional logging”, “Use patch retention harvesting instead of clearcutting”, “Use leave-tree harvesting instead of clearcutting”, “Use shelterwood harvesting instead of clearcutting” and “Retain riparian buffer strips during timber harvest”.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of harvesting groups of trees or using thinning instead of clearcutting. All three studies were in the USA.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Richness/diversity (3 studies): One controlled, before-and-after study in the USA found that the species richness of macro-moths was higher after a forest was harvested by thinning, than after harvest by patch-cutting or clearcutting, and the richness in the thinned forest was similar to an unharvested forest. One replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in the USA found that forests managed by group selection harvesting had a similar species richness of moths to forests managed by single tree harvesting or clearcutting, but a lower species richness than unharvested forest. One replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in the USA found that moth species richness recovered at a similar rate after management by group selection harvesting or clearcutting, but recovery in both was slower than after shelterwood harvesting.

POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
