2655: Establish long-term fishery closures
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Long-term closure of fisheries can be established to protect one or more species of key commercially harvested fish that have suffered continued overexploitation. They differ from other area-based closures based either on gear type(s) alone or those implemented in marine protected areas. This is because they generally apply to only one target fishery/species whilst often allowing other commercial fisheries to operate. In addition, closures of target fisheries do not involve legal protection of the seabed/habitat and may thus be more adaptive and easier to impose or even remove, particularly in response to a recovery of the target fish stock. Long-term fishery closures may be applied to protect commercial/harvested species year-round for an indefinite period. They may help depleted populations of fish to recover by reducing the fishing effort and thus mortality exerted upon them.
Evidence for a related intervention is summarized under ‘Establish temporary fishery closures'. See also ‘Cease or prohibit all (mobile and static) fishing gears that catch bottom (demersal) species’.

Key Messages:

Five studies examined the effects of establishing long-term fishery closures in an area on marine fish populations. One study was in each of the Norwegian Sea (Norway), the North Sea (UK), the Gulf of Maine (USA), the Bismark Sea (Papua New Guinea) and the Kattegat (Sweden/Denmark).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (4 STUDIES)

Condition (2 studies): One replicated, before-and-after study in the Norwegian Sea found that in the five years after the long-term closure of a commercial coastal fishery, the weights of young salmon returning to rivers were higher than before, and weights of older salmon were similar or lower. One site comparison study in the Gulf of Maine found that there were smaller, but similar condition monkfish inside an area closed year-round to groundfish fishing for six to seven years than an area open to all fishing.
Abundance (4 studies): Two site comparison studies in the Gulf of Maine and Bismark Sea found a higher abundance of only one of seven fish species and lower abundance of monkfish in areas closed to groundfish (bottom-dwelling) fisheries for six to eight years, compared to open areas. One of two replicated, before-and-after studies (one controlled) in the Norwegian Sea and North Sea found that there were more young salmon and similar numbers of older salmon returning to rivers than before, in the five years after the long-term closure of a commercial coastal fishery. The other study found that lesser sandeel biomass and density peaked but there was no overall increase in the three years after a long-term fishery closure compared to before.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Behaviour change (1 study): One site comparison study in the Bismark Sea found that in an area closed to customary fishing for eight years, six of seven fish species had a lower flight response distance compared to an area open to customary fishing, making them more vulnerable to capture with spear guns.

OTHER (3 STUDIES)

Reduction of unwanted catch (1 study): One replicated, before-and-after study in the Kattegat found that a combination of long-term fishery closures and areas limited to specific gears reduced unwanted catch of cod compared to before.
Reduction of fishing effort (1 study): One replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in the North Sea found that long-term closure of a commercial fishery reduced overall fishing effort for lesser sandeel.
Commercial catch abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in the North Sea found that annual sandeel catch rates were varied after the indefinite closure of the commercial fishery in an area.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
