2714: Use a square mesh instead of a diamond mesh codend in a trawl net
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Commercial fishing trawlers conventionally use a net constructed of diamond shaped mesh due to its ability to capture and retain a wide range of sizes and species (Sala et al. 2008). However, many of the fish species or individuals are often small, immature, or unmarketable, and will not yet have had the chance to spawn and even if returned to the sea, might not survive (Sala et al. 2008). It is difficult for many fish to escape from diamond mesh trawl codends because the mesh openings close under tension during fishing deployments (Isaksen & Valdemarsen (1986). Square shaped mesh however, retains its shape better under strain and maintains a larger size of the gaps in the meshes, potentially allowing greater escape opportunities for smaller fish and invertebrates (Robertson & Stewart, 1986). Square mesh trawl codends instead of diamond mesh codends may therefore increase the escape of small fish from trawl nets and reduce fishing mortality.
Evidence for a similar intervention applied to trawl nets only is summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification – ‘Rotate the orientation of diamond mesh in a trawl net’. For interventions describing the effects of different mesh types in fishing gear more generally, but including trawl nets, see ‘Fishing gear modification - Use a larger mesh size’. Evidence of this intervention when used in combination with other interventions to reduce unwanted catch in trawl nets is summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification - Fit mesh escape panels/windows to a trawl net and use square mesh instead of diamond mesh codend’ and ‘Fit a size-sorting escape grid (rigid or flexible) to trawl nets and use a square mesh instead of a diamond mesh codend’. Interventions describing the use of sections of square mesh (or large diamond mesh) inserted into diamond mesh nets, see ‘Fishing gear modification - Fit mesh escape panels/windows to a trawl net’ and ‘Modify the configuration of a mesh escape panel/window in a trawl net’.
Isaksen B. & Valdermarsen J.W. (1986) Selectivity experiments with square mesh codends in bottom trawls. ICES C.M., 1986/B:28.
Robertson J.H.B. & Stewart P.A.M. (1986) An analysis of length selection data from comparative fishing experiments on haddock and whiting with square and diamond mesh codends. Scottish Fisheries working Paper, 9/86.
Sala A., Lucchetti A., Piccinetti C. & Ferretti M. (2008) Size selection by diamond- and square-mesh codends in multi-species Mediterranean demersal trawl fisheries. Fisheries Research, 93, 8–21.

Key Messages:

Twenty-six studies examined the effects of using a square mesh instead of a diamond mesh codend in a trawl net on marine fish populations. Five studies were in the North Atlantic Ocean (Canada, Portugal, USA), four were in the Aegean Sea (Greece, Turkey), three were in the Mediterranean Sea (Spain) and the Tasman Sea (Australia), two studies were in each of the English Channel (UK), the Adriatic Sea (Italy) and the South Pacific Ocean (Australia, Chile), and one study was in each of the Greenland Sea (Iceland), the North Pacific Ocean (USA), the Bristol Channel (UK), the Kattegat and the Skagerrak (Denmark) and the Coral Sea (Australia). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Survival (2 studies): One of two replicated, paired, controlled studies in the Aegean Sea and Bristol Channel found that the short-term survival of two of six fish species was higher after escaping through a square mesh compared to a diamond mesh codend. The other study reported that skate caught in a square mesh codend had a higher overall survival likelihood than those caught in a diamond mesh codend.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (25 STUDIES)

Reduction of unwanted catch (16 studies): Ten of 16 replicated, controlled studies (including five paired, three randomized and three randomized and paired) in the Greenland Sea, Aegean Sea, Atlantic Ocean, Tasman Sea, Pacific Ocean, Mediterranean Sea, English Channel, Bristol Channel and Coral Sea, found that square mesh codends reduced the unwanted (non-target or non-marketable/discarded) catches of all fish species monitored, young individuals of half or most commercially targeted fish, total unwanted catch (fish and invertebrates), and discarded fish in deeper but not shallower fishing areas, compared to diamond mesh codends; and two of those studies also found that there was a variable effect on unwanted catch between individual fish species/groups. Four studies found no reduction in catches of unwanted small rockfish and flatfish, three of four commercially important bottom fish species, total unwanted catch (fish and invertebrates), or the total number of unwanted species (fish and invertebrates), compared to diamond mesh codends. One study found that square mesh codends retained more fish overall than diamond mesh but varied for individual species by fish shape and size. One study found that unwanted fish catch depended on codend mesh size as well as configuration (square or diamond). Two of the studies, where square mesh codends had no or a varied effect, also found that size selectivity increased with increases in mesh size for both square and diamond mesh codends.
Improved size-selectivity of fishing gear (14 studies): Six of 14 replicated, controlled studies (including three paired, one randomized and one randomized and paired) in the Atlantic Ocean, Mediterranean Sea, Adriatic Sea, Aegean Sea, English Channel, Pacific Ocean, Tasman Sea and the Kattegat and Skagerrak, found that using a square mesh codend in a trawl net (bottom and pelagic) improved size selectivity for silver hake, horse mackerel, European hake, axillary seabream, poor cod, greater forkbeard, blue whiting, discarded fish and three of four commercially targeted fish, compared to diamond mesh codends. Five studies found no difference in size selectivity between square and diamond mesh codends for Atlantic mackerel, long rough dab, yellowtail scad and striped seapike, rockfish and flatfish, and three of four commercially important bottom fish species. The other three studies found that the effect of square mesh instead of diamond mesh codends varied with fish body shape (round or flat), and for three of three and five of five roundfish species size selectivity was improved, but not for one flatfish. Two of the studies, where square mesh codends had either no or a varied effect, also found that size selectivity increased with increases in mesh size for both square and diamond mesh codends.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
