2138: Fit one or more mesh escape panels/windows to trawl nets and use a square mesh instead of a diamond mesh codend
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Trawling is a method of fishing that involves pulling a cone-shaped fishing net (trawl) through the water behind one or more boats. The net is wide at the opening and narrows to a bag or ‘codend’, tied at the end with a drawstring, where organisms are trapped. Trawl nets can catch a considerable number of unwanted organisms, including non-commercially targeted species and organisms under the legal-size limit. Standard trawl nets are made from diamond-shaped mesh. To reduce the amount of unwanted organisms, a net can be modified by fitting one or more mesh “escape panels” in the outer mesh of the net before the codend, in combination with a codend made of square mesh instead of diamond mesh. These modifications are designed to allow smaller unwanted organisms to escape the main body of the net and the codend, while retaining the commercially targeted organisms.
Evidence related to the use of each modification (mesh panels and square-mesh codend) separately, are summarised under “Threat: Biological resource use – Fit one or more mesh escape panels/windows to trawl nets” and “Use a square mesh instead of a diamond mesh codend on trawl nets”.

Key Messages:

One study examined the effects of fitting one or more mesh escape panels to trawl nets and using a square mesh instead of a diamond mesh codend on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations. The study was in the English Channel (UK).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Unwanted catch abundance (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in the English Channel found that trawl nets fitted with two large square mesh release panels and a square mesh codend caught fewer unwanted catch of non-commercial invertebrates compared to standard trawl nets.

OTHER (1 STUDY)

Commercial catch abundance (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in the English Channel found that trawl nets fitted with two large square mesh release panels and a square mesh codend caught fewer commercial shellfish, and fewer but more valuable commercially important fish, compared to standard trawl nets.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
