909: Amend the soil with formulated chemical compounds
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Water potential measures the tendency of water to move from one area to another due to osmosis, gravity, mechanical pressure, or other effects. Water potential is useful in understanding water movement within plants, animals, and soil. If possible, water will move from an area of higher water potential (lots of water molecules per given volume) to an area that has a lower water potential (fewer water molecules per given volume).
Most slow-release fertilizers release nutrients gradually over time and at specific soil temperatures. Quick-release fertilizers are useful for plants which require higher amounts of nutrients, or a quick supply due to a nutrient deficiency. They tend to break down in the soil much more quickly than slow-release fertilizers. Ammonium-N is often added to soils as a fertilizer for crops. When added to the soil, soil bacteria convert it to nitrate (nitrification). If plants do not take up the ammonium-N immediately it gets converted to nitrate and can be lost from the soil (leaching). A nitrification inhibitor stops or slows down this conversion, and can reduce the loss of nitrate from the soil.
 

Key Messages:
Nutrient loss: Three of five replicated trials from New Zealand and the UK measured the effect of applying nitrification inhibitors to the soil and three found reduced nitrate losses and nitrous oxide emissions, although one of these found that the method of application influenced its effect [Thompson]. One trial found no effect on nitrate loss. One trial found reduced nutrient and soil loss when aluminium sulphate was applied to the soil.
Soil organic matter: Five of six studies (including three controlled, randomized and replicated and one randomized and replicated) from Australia, China, India, Syria and the UK testing the effects of adding chemical compounds to the soil showed an increase in soil organic matter or carbon when nitrogen or phosphorus fertilizer was applied. One site comparison study showed that a slow-release fertilizer resulted in higher nutrient retention. One study found higher carbon levels when NPK fertilizers were applied with straw, than when applied alone, and one replicated study from France found higher soil carbon when manure rather than chemical compounds were applied.
Yield: One replicated trial from India and a trial from the Philippines showed that maize, wheat and rice yield increased with increased fertilizer application.
Soil types covered: clay, fine loamy, gravelly-sandy loam, loam, loamy sand, sandy loam, silty, silty-clay, silt-loam.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Soil Fertility
Description: Soils Synopsis
