3911: Translocate to establish populations outside of known range 
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Climate change is increasingly reducing the suitability of habitat within species’ historic ranges, while a combination of habitat fragmentation and poor dispersal ability can limit species’ ability to colonize new areas which have become more climatically suitable. Translocation of butterflies and moths to areas outside of their previously recorded range could be used to seed new populations in more climatically suitable areas, which species may struggle to colonize on their own (Willis et al. 2009). This action includes translocations to areas outside of a species’ native range, whether or not done explicitly for climate change adaptation, but only if the translocation was within the same biogeographic region (e.g. translocations between continents are not included).
CAUTION: Before translocating butterflies and moths, the impact of the removal of individuals from the donor site must be considered, to avoid harming existing populations.
For studies on the translocation of butterflies and moths to areas within their known range, see “Translocate to re-establish populations in known or believed former range”. For studies on the release of captive-bred butterflies and moths, see “Release captive-bred individuals to the wild”.
Willis S.G., Hill J.K., Thomas C.D., Roy D.B., Fox R., Blakeley D.S. & Huntley B. (2009) Assisted colonization in a changing climate: a test-study using two U.K. butterflies. Conservation Letters, 2, 46–52.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects of translocating butterflies and moths to establish populations outside of their known range. Two studies were in the USA and one was in each of the Czech Republic and the UK.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (4 STUDIES)

Abundance (3 studies): Two of three studies in the USA and the UK reported that populations of Gillette’s checkerspot, small skipper and marbled white translocated outside of their native range as eggs or adults (in one case including captive-bred individuals) persisted and increased in abundance over eight and 28 years. The third study reported that a population of Gillette’s checkerspot adults, eggs and caterpillars translocated outside their native range died out within one year.
Condition (1 study): One study in the Czech Republic found that 69 years after translocation, an introduced population of the small mountain ringlet butterfly had similar genetic diversity to its source population, and higher genetic diversity than a small native population.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
