3899: Stop using herbicides on pavements and road verges 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Plants growing within urban landscapes, such as along pavements or road verges, can provide important habitat for wildlife, including butterflies and moths, but these areas are often subject to intense management, including regular doses of herbicide to control plant growth. However, herbicides can have lethal or sub-lethal effects on butterflies and moths (Russell & Schultz 2010, Schultz et al. 2016). Stopping the use of herbicides on pavements and road verges may help to support butterfly and moth populations in urban areas.
For other management options for road verges, see “Residential and commercial development – Alter mowing regimes on greenspaces and road verges” and “Transportation and service corridors – Restore or maintain species-rich grassland along road/railway verges”.
Russell C. & Schultz C.B. (2010) Effects of grass-specific herbicides on butterflies: an experimental investigation to advance conservation efforts. Journal of Insect Conservation, 14, 53–63.
Schultz C.B., Zemaitis J.L., Thomas C.C., Bowers M.D. & Crone E.E. (2016) Non-target effects of grass-specific herbicides differ among species, chemicals and host plants in Euphydryas butterflies. Journal of Insect Conservation, 20, 867–877.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of stopping the use of herbicides on pavements and road verges. One study was in the USA and the other was in Canada.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Richness/diversity (2 studies): One replicated, paired, site comparison study in the USA found that restored roadside prairies where herbicide application was restricted had a greater species richness of butterflies than verges dominated by non-native weeds and grasses with no restrictions on herbicide application. One replicated, site comparison study in Canada found that transmission lines (road verges and power lines) which were neither sprayed with herbicide nor mown had a similar species richness of butterflies to sprayed and mown transmission lines.

POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Abundance (2 studies): One replicated, paired, site comparison study in the USA found that restored roadside prairies where herbicide application was restricted had a greater abundance of butterflies than verges dominated by non-native weeds and grasses with no restrictions on herbicide application. One replicated, site comparison study in Canada found that transmission lines (road verges and power lines) which were neither sprayed with herbicide nor mown had a greater abundance of northern pearl crescent and pearl crescent butterflies, but similar total butterfly abundance, compared to sprayed and mown transmission lines.
Survival (1 study): One replicated, paired, site comparison study in the USA found that butterflies had a lower mortality risk on restored roadside prairies where herbicide application was restricted than on verges dominated by non-native grasses with no restrictions on herbicide application.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
