3048: Cut large trees/shrubs to maintain or restore disturbance: freshwater swamps
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Disturbance can clear dominant plants (including trees and shrubs), maintain light availability and control nutrient levels – and may maintain vegetation in a desirable and/or species-rich state (Hall et al. 2008; Middleton 2013). Therefore, conservationists sometimes want to actively restore disturbance where it has ceased, or maintain disturbance at a site where it would otherwise be lost.
Large trees and shrubs may need to be managed by cutting individual plants, stems or branches with loppers, saws or chainsaws. These actions are the focus of this section. Afterwards, regrowth of trees and shrubs may be managed by grazing, mowing or herbicide (effects covered elsewhere in synopsis). Caution: Tree/shrub removal may be most desirable in open habitats like marshes and meadows. It is more typically a threat in swamps, although some thinning may be desirable here.
Related interventions: Use cutting to control problematic large trees/shrubs, whose success is not linked to a change in disturbance regime; Cut/remove/thin forest plantations; Cut/mow herbaceous plants (or small woody plants) to maintain or restore disturbance.
Related actions: Use cutting to control problematic large trees/shrubs, whose success is not linked to a change in disturbance regime; Cut/remove/thin forest plantations; Cut/mow herbaceous plants (or small woody plants) to maintain or restore disturbance.
Hall S.J., Lindig-Cisneros R. & Zedler J.B. (2008) Does harvesting sustain plant diversity in Central Mexican wetlands? Wetlands, 28, 776–792.
Middleton B.A. (2013) Rediscovering traditional vegetation management in preserves: trading experiences between cultures and continents. Biological Conservation, 158, 750–760.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of cutting large trees/shrubs to maintain or restore disturbance in freshwater swamps. The study was in the USA.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Herb abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled, before-and-after, site comparison study of freshwater swamps in the USA found that cutting woody vegetation (and applying herbicide) had no significant effect on herbaceous ground cover one year later: there were similar changes in treated and untreated swamps.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Basal area (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled, before-and-after, site comparison study of freshwater swamps in the USA found that cutting woody vegetation (and applying herbicide) had no significant effect on the basal area of woody vegetation one year later: there were similar changes in treated and untreated swamps.
Canopy cover (1 study): The same study found that cutting woody vegetation (and applying herbicide) reduced canopy cover – to similar levels as in high-quality swamps after one year.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
