3773: Release captive-bred reptiles into the wild: Tuatara
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Captive breeding is normally used to provide individuals that can then be released into the wild (often called ‘reintroduction’) to either re-establish a population that has been lost, or to augment an existing population (‘restocking’).
Release techniques vary considerably, from ‘hard releases’ involving the simple release of individuals into the wild to ‘soft releases’ which involve a variety of adaptation and acclimatisation techniques before release, or post-release feeding and care.
This action includes studies describing the effects of release programmes for captive-bred reptiles that do not specifically test the effectiveness of specific release techniques. For studies that compare specific release techniques see Use holding pens or enclosures at release site prior to release of captive-bred reptiles; Use holding pens or enclosures at release site prior to release of wild reptiles and Release reptiles into burrows.
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians. See here for: Sea turtles; Tortoises, terrapins, side-necked & softshell turtles; Snakes & lizards or Crocodilians.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects of releasing captive-bred tuatara into the wild. One study was in New Zealand and one was a global review.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Abundance (1 study): One global review found that when using recruitment to the adult population as a measure of success, 32% of reptile translocations/releases (releases of captive individuals were 7% of total projects) were successful.
Condition (1 study): One study in New Zealand found that tuatara reared close to the release site had higher growth, but similar body condition compared to individuals reared in a warmer climate.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Behaviour change (1 studies): One study in New Zealand found that tuatara reared close to the release site had similar home range sizes and post-release dispersal compared to individuals reared in a warmer climate.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
