2926: Hand-rear orphaned or abandoned marine and freshwater mammal young
Effectiveness rating: Trade off between benefit and harms
Background information and definitions:
Young marine and freshwater mammals believed to be orphaned or abandoned are sometimes taken into captivity by wildlife rehabilitators, to be reared and released back into the wild. Often this is done more for animal welfare reasons than for species conservation, although for rare species, release of such animals may provide opportunities to augment wild populations. The success of such programmes can be difficult to judge without long-term survival data or benchmark data for survival of wild-reared mammals.
See also Reunite abandoned marine and freshwater mammal young with parents and Place orphaned or abandoned marine and freshwater mammal young with foster parents. For studies that hand-reared captive-born mammals, see Breed marine and freshwater mammals in captivity. For studies that brought mammal young into captivity for rehabilitation (as opposed to hand-rearing), see Rehabilitate and release injured, sick or weak marine and freshwater mammals.

Key Messages:

Twelve studies evaluated the effects of hand-rearing orphaned or abandoned marine and freshwater mammal young. Four studies were in the North Pacific Ocean (USA), two studies were in captive facilities (USA), and one study was in each of the North Atlantic Ocean (USA), the Indian River Lagoon (USA), the Salish Sea (USA), the Guerrero Lagoon (USA), the South Atlantic Ocean (Brazil) and water bodies in Florida (USA).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (11 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (1 study): One replicated study in the South Atlantic Ocean found that most captive-reared Antillean manatees released back into the wild reproduced.
Survival (11 studies): Three studies (including one replicated and controlled study) in the North Pacific Ocean, and the Indian River Lagoon found that a gray whale calf, three Steller sea lion pups, and a common bottlenose dolphin calf that were released after being reared in captivity survived during post-release monitoring periods of between three days to three months. Two replicated studies in the South Atlantic Ocean and water bodies in Florida found that approximately three-quarters of Antillean manatees and two-thirds of Florida manatees that were captive-reared and released were known to survive for at least one year, and some survived for more than seven years. Three studies in the North Atlantic Ocean, the North Pacific Ocean and the Guerrero Lagoon found that three West Indian manatee calves, seven Hawaiian monk seal pups and one Antillean manatee calf that were captive-reared either died before or after release, had to be returned to captivity after release, or survived in the wild only with supplemental feeding. Two studies at captive facilities found that a captive-reared grey whale calf and five pygmy and dwarf sperm whale calves increased in body weight but were either not released or died in captivity. One controlled study in the North Pacific Ocean found that captive-reared, released Pacific harbour seal pups had similar survival estimates to wild pups.

BEHAVIOUR (3 STUDIES)

Behaviour change (3 studies): Two controlled studies (including one replicated study) in the North Pacific Ocean found that captive-reared and released Pacific harbour seal pups and Steller sea lion pups had similar diving behaviour to wild pups. One controlled study in the Salish Sea found that captive-reared and released harbour seal pups travelled greater distances and further from the release site than wild pups born at the same site and in the same season.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
