3909: Translocate to re-establish populations in known or believed former range  
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Many species of butterfly and moth have severely declined or gone extinct in parts of their former range, particularly in areas where high rates of habitat conversion have occurred (Fox et al. 2010, Maes & Van Dyck 2001, van Swaay 1990). Given the poor dispersal ability of many species, and the highly fragmented nature of many landscapes, the transportation of individuals to suitable sites may be the only means by which a species is able to recolonize. Releases could be composed of translocated animals (caught in the wild at another site) or captive-bred animals (bred from captive populations over one or more generations, see “Rear declining species in captivity” and “Release captive-bred individuals to the wild”), and individuals at any life stage (adult, egg, caterpillar or pupa) may be used for capture and release.
Note that restoring habitat quality prior to the release of translocated butterflies and moths is likely to be an important factor determining the success of reintroduction projects (Schultz et al. 2008). Furthermore, for parasitic species such as the large blues Phengaris (Maculinea) spp., which rely on specific hosts (ants Myrmica spp.) for survival, the translocation of ant colonies from the same source site as the butterflies may increase caterpillar survival (Witek et al. 2016).
CAUTION: Before translocating butterflies and moths, the impact of the removal of individuals from the donor site must be considered, to avoid harming existing populations.
For studies on the release of butterflies and moths outside of their known range, see “Translocate to establish populations outside of known range”.
Fox R., Warren M.S., Brereton T.M., Roy D.B. & Robinson A. (2010) A new Red List of British butterflies. Insect Conservation and Diversity­, 4, 159–172.
Maes D. & Van Dyck H. (2001) Butterfly diversity loss in Flanders (north Belgium): Europe’s worst case scenario? Biological Conservation, 99, 263–276.
Schultz C.B., Russell C. & Wynn L. (2008) Restoration, reintroduction, and captive propagation for at-risk butterflies: A review of British and American conservation efforts. Israel Journal of Ecology & Evolution, 54, 41–61.
van Swaay C.A.M. (1990) An assessment of the changes in butterfly abundance in The Netherlands during the 20th Century. Biological Conservation, 52, 287–302.
Witek M., Ślipiński P., Trigos Peral G. & Csata E. (2016) Consequences of the arms race between Maculinea teleius social parasite and Myrmica host ants for myrmecophilous butterfly conservation. Journal of Insect Conservation, 20, 887–893.

Key Messages:

Sixteen studies evaluated the effects of translocating butterflies and moths to re-establish populations within their former range. Seven studies were in the UK, two were reviews across the UK and Ireland, two studies were in Finland and one study was in each of the USA, Australia, the Netherlands, Belgium and the Netherlands and the UK and Sweden.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (16 STUDIES)

Abundance (13 studies): Eight studies in the UK, Finland, the USA, Australia, the Netherlands and Belgium and the Netherlands reported that translocated populations of adult butterflies and Fisher’s estuarine moth eggs persisted for 2–12 years and increased in abundance (sometimes in areas where coppicing, selective felling, planting, fencing, host plant translocation, invasive plant removal, sheep grazing, scrub clearance or unspecified habitat restoration were conducted before or after release). Three studies (including two replicated studies) in the UK and Finland reported that some translocated populations of silver-studded blue and clouded Apollo adults, and belted beauty moth eggs and caterpillars, persisted for 1–49 years (in one case where vegetation had been removed before release), increased in abundance and colonized new sites, but other populations died out within 0–7 years. One of two reviews across the UK and Ireland found that 25% of translocated and released captive-bred butterfly populations survived for at least three years, but 38% died out in that time, and only 8% were known to have survived for more than 10 years. The other review reported that translocated populations of large copper adults and/or caterpillars (sometimes to areas planted with great water dock or where bushes had been cleared, or alongside the release of captive-bred individuals) survived for up to 38 years, but ultimately died out or had to be supplemented by further releases.
Survival (2 studies): Two site comparison studies (including one replicated, paired study) in the UK found that the survival of large blue caterpillars was higher when translocated into Myrmica sabuleti nests without queen ants present than with queens present, and the survival of translocated large copper caterpillars was higher than the survival of released, captive-bred caterpillars.
Condition (1 study): One site comparison in the UK and Sweden found that 19 years after translocation, large blue butterflies in the UK had similar genetic diversity to their Swedish source population.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
