3663: Retain connectivity between habitat patches 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Habitat fragmentation, as well as destruction, may be an important driver of population declines. Small areas hold fewer species than large ones and if individuals are unable to cross areas of converted habitat then populations in separate habitat patches will become isolated. This potentially makes them more vulnerable to extinction, from natural variations in birth and death rates or sex ratios, from inbreeding depression and from outside pressures, both natural (such as storms or wildfires) and man-made (such as hunting or continued habitat loss), although the precise effects of habitat fragmentation, as opposed to loss, are debated (e.g. Fahrig 1997).
Theoretically, the number of species surviving in a habitat fragment is determined by its size and its effective distance to other habitat patches (MacArthur & Wilson 1967). Maintaining habitat connectivity is therefore often seen as a way to increase the viability of populations, but there is considerable debate as to the effectiveness of such ‘wildlife corridors’ (e.g. Beier & Noss 1998).
Studies describing the effects of creating or restoring habitat, rather than retaining what is already there, are in Habitat restoration and creation.
Beier P. & Noss R.F. (1998) Do habitat corridors provide connectivity? Conservation Biology, 12, 1241–1252.
Fahrig L. (1997) Relative Effects of Habitat Loss and Fragmentation on Population Extinction. The Journal of Wildlife Management, 61, 603–610.
MacArthur R.H. (1967) The Theory of Island Biogeography. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects of retaining connectivity between habitat patches on reptile populations. One study was in Brazil and one was in Madagascar.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Community composition (2 studies): One replicated, site comparison study in Brazil found that forest fragments connected by corridors and isolated forest fragments had similar reptile species composition. One site comparison study in Madagascar found that in an area with hedges connecting different habitat types, reptile communities were more similar across the different habitat types than in an area with no hedges.
Richness/diversity (2 studies): One replicated, site comparison study in Brazil found that forest fragments connected by corridors and isolated forest fragments had similar reptile species richness. One site comparison study in Madagascar found that an area with hedges connecting different habitat types had more unique reptile species than an area without hedges.

POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in Brazil found that forest fragments connected by corridors and isolated forest fragments had a similar abundance of reptiles, including leaf litter lizards.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
