2988: Backfill canals or trenches: brackish/salt marshes
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Backfilling involves returning dredged or excavated material to a canal (e.g. dug for boat traffic) or trench (e.g. dug for pipelines). Sometimes additional soil or sediment is brought in if there is not enough excavated material left. In theory, backfilling restores more natural wetland conditions: the water depth in the canal and the height of adjacent spoil heaps are both reduced. The whole area then has more natural water levels and may support desirable marsh or swamp vegetation. Backfilling a canal will usually prevent boats from using it too. The success of this action may depend heavily on the skill of the operator, e.g. their ability to create the desired water/soil elevations and avoid overcompacting the fill material. Turner et al. (1994) estimated that backfilling canals in Louisiana cost US$1.20/m3 (US$1.98 corrected to 2017).
For this action, as throughout the synopsis, we have only summarized results that are solely or predominantly related to the specified habitat. For example, the results in Turner et al. (1994) combine data from approximately 80% brackish or salt marshes and 20% freshwater marshes – so they have not been summarized as evidence for freshwater marshes.
Evidence summarized for this action relates to effects on vegetation within or immediately adjacent to canals or trenches, dug as or associated with service corridors.
Related actions: Plug/dam canals or trenches; Raise water level to restore degraded marshes; Raise water level to restore/create marshes from other land uses; Fill/block ditches not associated with service corridors; Remove surface soil/sediment.
Turner R.E., Lee J.M. & Neill C. (1994) Backfilling canals to restore wetlands: empirical results in coastal Louisiana. Wetlands Ecology and Management, 3, 63–78.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of backfilling canals or trenches in brackish/salt marshes. All four studies were in the USA. There was overlap in the canals used in three of the studies. All studies included some freshwater areas in some analyses, but all results are based predominantly on canals in brackish or saline marshes.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall extent (4 studies): One paired, site comparison study in marshes in the USA reported that emergent vegetation coverage was typically lower in backfilled canals, after four years, than in adjacent undisturbed marsh. Three other studies in marshes in the USA simply reported coverage of emergent marsh vegetation between 6 months and 25 years after backfilling canals. All four studies reported that coverage was greater on former spoil areas alongside canals than within the partly filled canal channels. Two of the studies also reported the frequency of submerged/floating vegetation after 6–60 months, and one reported coverage of upland plant species on spoil banks that had not been completely levelled after 6–11 years.
Overall richness/diversity (2 studies): One replicated, site comparison study in marshes in the USA reported that former spoil areas alongside backfilled canals had greater plant species richness than nearby natural marsh, due to the presence of upland species on unlevelled areas. One other study of a backfilled canal in predominantly brackish and saline marshes in the USA simply quantified richness of submerged vegetation four years after backfilling.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE
 
VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
