3811: Introduce an overall catch limit (quota cap or total allowable catch) by fishery or fleet
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
An overall catch limit, also known as total allowable catch or quota cap, prescribes the maximum amount (weight or number) that a fishery or fleet is permitted to harvest from a commercial fish stock. Catch limits may be set annually, biannually or for a season by an advisory body, generally based on scientific advice derived from an assessment of stock status. Catch limits may be implemented for stocks that are shared and jointly managed between countries and can be exchanged between them. When a country’s prescribed national limit for a species has been used up, it must close the fishery. Setting overall catch limits may control fishing effort and mortality and thus help avoid over-fishing and depletion of both commercial and non-commercially targeted fish populations.

Key Messages:

Nine studies examined the effects of introducing overall catch limits by fishery or fleet on marine fish populations. Three studies were worldwide, two studies were in the South Atlantic Ocean (Namibia/South Africa), two studies were in the North Sea (Northern Europe), and one study was in each of the North Sea and Atlantic Ocean (Scotland) and the North Atlantic Ocean (Canada).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (6 STUDIES)

Abundance (5 studies): Four before-and-after studies (two replicated) in the South Atlantic Ocean, the North Atlantic Ocean and the North Sea reported that following the introduction of overall catch limits for fish there was a higher abundance or biomass of hakes, Atlantic herring and Atlantic halibut, compared to before. One replicated, controlled study of fish stocks worldwide found that overfished stocks of tunas and billfishes had faster increases of biomass when managed using overall catch limits, compared to stocks with other types of control or no management.
Reproductive success (1 study): A global review reported that after overall catch limits and minimum landing size were introduced there was strong recruitment of broadbill swordfish for one key stock, while recruitment for four other stocks could not be assessed due to limited data.
Survival (2 studies): One before-and-after study and one replicated, controlled study in the North Atlantic Ocean and worldwide found that for fish species with overall catch limits there was a decrease or lower fishing mortality, compared either to before implementation or to stocks without catch limits and those with other controls.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (3 STUDIES)

Reduction of unwanted catch (1 study): One replicated, before-and-after study in the North Sea and North Atlantic Ocean found that overall catch limits did not reduce unwanted megrim catch despite a reduction in discards, however this was due to retention of more small but legal-sized megrim, previously discarded.
Reduction of fishing effort (1 study): One replicated, before-and-after study in the North Sea found that when annual total allowable catch limits were changed (increased or decreased), half of the otter trawl fleet had corresponding changes in fishing effort (increased or decreased), but there were no changes for the beam trawl fleet.
Stock status (1 study): One global systematic review found that in terms of reaching biomass-based management targets fisheries with fleet-wide catch quotas were no different to fisheries managed either by catch shares or effort controls. However, along with catch share fisheries, fewer catch quota stocks were over-exploited than those with effort controls.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
