886: Exclude ants that protect pests
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This involves applying adhesive substances or chemicals to the trunks of perennial crop trees, preventing pest-protecting ants from reaching the branches. Many ants form mutualistic relationships with insect pests (e.g. feeding on honeydew secreted by bugs (Hemiptera) such as aphids), defending them from predators and parasitoids. Excluding these ants may therefore increase predation and parasitism rates by beneficial invertebrates. See also 'Isolate colonies of beneficial ants' for managing ants that act as natural predators and improve pest control.

Key Messages:
Parasitism: One of two replicated, controlled studies (one also randomised) from Japan and the USA found greater parasitism of pests by natural enemies when ants were excluded from trees. The other study found greater parasitism at one site but no effect at another. Natural enemies: Five studies (including four randomised, replicated, controlled trials) from Japan, Switzerland and the USA found effects varied between natural enemy species and groups, sampling dates, sites, crop varieties and ground cover types beneath trees. Pests: Three of seven studies (including four randomised, replicated, controlled trials) found fewer pests and another found fewer pests at times of peak abundance only. One study found mixed effects depending on date and other actions taken simultaneously (predator attractant and ground cover treatments). One study found no effect. Damage and tree growth: One study found no effect on damage to tree foliage but one study found greater tree growth. Ants: Six studies found that glue or pesticide barriers reduced ant numbers in tree or vine canopies. One study found that citrus oil barriers had no effect.
Crops studied were cherimoyas, cherry, grape, grapefruit, orange, pecan and satsuma mandarin.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Natural Pest Control
Description: Natural Pest Control Synopsis
