3207: Facilitate tidal exchange to restore/create brackish/salt marshes from other land uses
Effectiveness rating: Beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This action includes actions that facilitate tidal exchange, in order to restore or create marshes from other land uses. The action may be a single permanent one (e.g. breaching sea walls or embankments, installing or widening culverts, excavating tidal creeks) or a reversible one (e.g. opening sluice gates once per day). However, the intervention must affect an area that does not retain substantial characteristics of the target habitat. This could be an upland area (e.g. the thousands of square kilometres of farmland that has been reclaimed from salt marsh in the Netherlands since the Middle Ages; Wolff 1992), an unvegetated wetland (e.g. mudflats), or a wetland other than the target type (e.g. swamp, where the habitat used to be a marsh). “Planned retreat” and “managed realignment” fall within the scope of this action.
Tidal wetlands may be brackish/saline (e.g. mangroves, coastal marshes) or freshwater (e.g. at the upstream end of estuaries, as in the Mississippi, Yangtze, and Elbe rivers; Baldwin et al. 2009). Studies of accidental realignment, such as when coastal defences are breached by a storm, have not been summarized as evidence (e.g. Onaindia et al. 2001; some sites in Williams & Orr 2002).
Related actions: Facilitate tidal exchange to restore degraded marshes; Reprofile/relandscape or Remove surface soil/sediment, both of which can alter patterns of tidal exchange; Facilitate tidal exchange to complement planting.
Baldwin A.H., Barendregt A. & Whigham D. (2009) Tidal Freshwater Wetlands. Backhuys Publishers, Lieden.
Onaindia M., Albizu I. & Amezaga I. (2001) Effect of time on the natural regeneration of salt marsh. Applied Vegetation Science, 4, 247–256.
Williams P.B. & Orr M.K. (2002) Physical evolution of restored breached levee salt marshes in the San Francisco Bay estuary. Restoration Ecology, 10, 527–542.
Wolff W.J. (1992) The end of a tradition: 1000 years of embankment and reclamation of wetlands in the Netherlands. Ambio, 21, 287–291.

Key Messages:

Fourteen studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of facilitating tidal exchange to restore/create brackish/salt marshes from other land uses or habitat types. Seven studies were in the UK. Five studies were in the USA. There was one study in each of Australia and the Netherlands. There was overlap in the sites used in four of the studies.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall extent (3 studies): Three before-and-after studies in Australia, the UK and the Netherlands reported increases in the overall extent of salt marsh vegetation over 3–10 years after restoring tidal exchange.
Community types (3 studies): One replicated, paired, site comparison study in the UK reported that restored marshes, developing after 2–13 years of tidal exchange, contained a different type of salt marsh plant community to natural marshes in four of four cases. Two before-and-after studies in the UK and the Netherlands reported increases in the frequency or coverage of salt marsh plant communities after restoring tidal exchange, reaching 93–100% after 9–10 years.
Community composition (4 studies): Four site comparison studies (two replicated, one paired) in the UK and the USA reported that after facilitating tidal exchange on freshwater wetlands or farmland, the overall plant community composition remained somewhat different from natural brackish/salt marshes for up to 30 years. Three of the studies reported increasing community similarity to natural marshes over 11–30 years of tidal exchange.
Overall richness/diversity (6 studies): Two site comparison studies of brackish/salt marshes in the USA and the UK reported that overall plant species richness was similar in marshes developing after 4–11 years of tidal exchange, and in nearby natural marshes. Two site comparison studies (one replicated) of salt marshes in the UK reported that marshes developing after 1–14 years of tidal exchange (sometimes along with other interventions) had lower plant species richness or diversity than nearby natural marshes. Two before-and-after studies in the UK compared the number of plant/algae species present in salt marshes that developed over 1–9 years after restoring tidal exchange to the number of plant species present before intervention. In one study there were more species after intervention, but in the other study there were fewer.
Characteristic plant richness/diversity (2 studies): One replicated, site comparison study of salt marshes in the UK reported that marshes developing after 1–14 years of tidal exchange contained a similar number of salt-tolerant plant species to natural marshes. One before-and-after study in the Netherlands reported that all 23 target brackish/salt marsh species were present in the study site 10 years after restoring regular tidal exchange: more than were present before restoration.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (6 studies): Two site comparison studies (one replicated) of salt marshes in the UK reported that marshes developing after 1–14 years of tidal exchange (sometimes along with other interventions) had lower overall vegetation cover than nearby natural marshes. One before-and-after study in the UK reported that 99% of salt marsh quadrats were vegetated nine years after restoring tidal exchange, compared to 100% in the freshwater wetland that previously occupied the site and 43% one summer after restoration. Three studies in the USA and the UK simply quantified the overall cover of vegetation present in sites for up to 15 years after facilitating tidal exchange (sometimes along with other interventions).
Characteristic plant abundance (1 study): One site comparison study in the USA reported that some plant species diagnostic of natural brackish marshes were absent from a marsh that had developed over &gt;30 years of restored tidal exchange.
Individual species abundance (6 studies): Six studies quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. For example, three site comparison studies of salt marshes in the UK reported that cover of saltmarsh grass Puccinellia maritima was similar or lower in marshes developing after 1–14 years of tidal exchange (sometimes along with other interventions) than in nearby natural marshes. In contrast, in these studies, cover of glassworts Salicornia was higher in restored than natural marshes.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
