2680: Restrict fishing activity (types unspecified) in a marine protected area
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Marine Protected Areas are designations for marine sites in which fish (among other marine animals and habitats) conservation can be promoted through management of the fishing and other human activities that take place within them. Restricting fishing activity inside a protected area should reduce the overall fishing mortality and disturbance to fish habitats. In studies where the exact fishing types that are regulated inside a protected area are not reported, it may still be expected that fish populations may respond to an overall reduction in fishing pressure and exploitation.
Evidence for similar interventions relating to prohibiting human activity, including fishing, in marine protected areas is summarized under ‘Cease or prohibit all types of fishing in a marine protected area’, ‘Cease or prohibit all fishing activity in a marine protected area with limited exceptions’ and ‘Control human activity in a marine protected area with a zonation system of restrictions’.

Key Messages:

Two studies examined the effects of restricting (unspecified) fishing activity in a marine protected area on marine fish populations. One study was global and the other was in the Indian Ocean (Tanzania).

 COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Richness/diversity (1 study): One global review reported that of 11 studies showing effects of protection from restricting fishing activity in marine reserves, one found higher fish species richness inside reserves compared to non-protected fished areas.

POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Survival (1 study): One site comparison study in the Indian Ocean found that survival was higher for blackspot snapper inside a marine park with unspecified fishing restrictions and low fishing intensity compared to more intensively fished areas outside.
Abundance (1 study): One global review reported that 10 of 11 studies showing effects of protection from restricting fishing activity in marine reserves found higher abundance of fish inside the areas compared to areas without fishing restrictions.
Condition (2 studies): One site comparison study in the Indian Ocean found that blackspot snapper inside a marine park with unspecified fishing restrictions and low fishing intensity were of larger average size, reached older ages, but did not have different growth rates compared to more intensively fished areas outside the park. One global review reported that five out of 11 studies showing effects of protection from restricting fishing activity in marine reserves found fish were larger inside reserves compared to non-protected areas without fishing restrictions.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
