3422: Add charcoal to soil before seeding/planting
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Charcoal can be added to soil to increase its fertility, carbon storage, and water retention. When charcoal is used for soil amendment it is commonly known as biochar. Charcoal has a long history of use as a fertilizer, and was used by pre-Colombian Amazonians to enhance soil productivity. Adding charcoal to soil can increase crop yield in agricultural systems (Jeffery et al. 2011), and so addition of charcoal to soil alongside seeding in grasslands may help to increase survival and growth of grassland plants.
The studies detailed in this intervention are direct tests of the effectiveness of adding charcoal to the soil before seeding or planting (e.g. by comparison with an untreated but seeded or planted plot). Studies that represent comparisons of seeding to unseeded plots can be found in the actions ‘Sow grass seeds’, ‘Sow grassland forb species’ or ‘Sow native grass and forbs’.
Jeffery, S., Verheijen, F.G., van der Velde, M. & Bastos, A.C. (2011) A quantitative review of the effects of biochar application to soils on crop productivity using meta-analysis. Agriculture, ecosystems & environment, 144, 175–187.
 

Key Messages:

One study examined the effects of adding charcoal to soil before seeding/planting on grassland vegetation. The study was in the Netherlands.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY (0 STUDIES)
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE (1 STUDY)

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the Netherlands found that adding charcoal to soil before sowing seeds did not alter overall plant biomass.
Grass abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the Netherlands found that adding charcoal to soil before sowing seeds did not alter grass cover.
Forb abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the Netherlands found that adding charcoal to soil before sowing seeds increased the cover of legumes but did not alter the cover of other forbs.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Grassland Conservation
Description: Grassland Synopsis
