2713: Use an electric (pulse) trawl
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Pulse-equipped trawls are mainly beam trawls targeting flatfish (sole/plaice), but also shrimps. The tickler chains are replaced by electrodes that give off short electrical pulses, stunning the fish and raising them off the bottom and making them easier to catch (Polet et al. 2005). It is a highly controversial method and is prohibited in the USA, China and several other countries. It is also technically illegal in EU waters. However, an exception to the rules allows countries to catch up to 5% of their annual fishing quota in the North Sea using "innovative methods" for research, and the use of pulse trawls predominantly occurs here. The Netherlands is the biggest user of this method and in 2018, there were around 80 trawlers holding permits issued by the Dutch government. Despite attempts to ban it altogether, pulse fishing is still ‘allowed’ in EU waters until mid-2021. Many fishers and opposers to the method believe it harms the fish it is designed to catch and kills other marine life (Polet et al. 2005). However, there is evidence that suggests pulse-equipped trawls catch less unwanted marine life, including unwanted fish, than other trawlers (ICES 2020, Polet et al. 2005) and cause less damage to the sea floor (ICES 2020). Furthermore, the body of research assessing the effects of pulse trawling has recently been extended (see references in ICES 2020) and is therefore not within the scope of the current synopsis.
ICES. (2020) ICES Working Group on Electrical Trawling (WGELECTRA). ICES Scientific Reports, 37, 108 pp.
Polet H., Delanghe F. & Verschoore R. (2005) On electrical fishing for brown shrimp (Crangon crangon): II. Sea trials. Fisheries Research, 72, 13–27.

Key Messages:

Three studies examined the effects of using an electric (pulse) trawl on marine fish populations. The studies were in the North Sea (Belgium, Netherlands and multiple European countries). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (3 STUDIES)

Reduction of unwanted catch (3 studies): Two replicated, paired, controlled studies and one review in the North Sea found that using an electric/pulse trawl reduced the catches of non-target or undersized (discarded) commercial fish in some or all cases, compared to using a standard trawl.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
