3949: Restore or create wetlands and floodplains
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Wetland habitats are often drained or degraded during the development of agriculture or expansion of urban areas or other land uses. Restoration of these habitats can help to recover specialist butterfly and moth populations. Restoration of wetlands may involve a combination of interventions, such as removing invasive and emergent plants, maintaining bankside vegetation and trees, planting native species, and raising water levels or reinstating seasonal flooding.
Habitats within this action include wet grassland, fenland and floodplains. For studies on restoring dry grassland, see “Restore or create grassland/savannas”. For studies on restoring peatland, bogs, mires and wet heathland, see “Restore or create peatland”. For studies on the creation of smaller areas of water, see “Create scrapes and pools”.
This action includes studies where either multiple actions have been used to restore or create wetlands and floodplains, or where the specific action used is not clear. For studies of specific actions for creating, restoring, or managing wetlands and floodplains, see “Replant native vegetation”, “Manage wetlands or ponds by grazing or cutting to prevent succession” and “Natural system modifications – Use prescribed fire to maintain or restore disturbance in grasslands or other open habitats”.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of restoring or creating wetlands and floodplains. Two studies were in the USA and one was in Sweden.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in Sweden found that wetland creation increased macroinvertebrate diversity (including butterflies and moths), and that species richness increased with wetland age and was similar to mature ponds.

POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Abundance (1 study): One site comparison study in the USA found that wetland prairie restored by seeding willow dock and seasonal flooding had a higher abundance of great copper eggs than degraded, unflooded prairie.
Survival (1 study): One site comparison study in the USA found that the survival of great copper eggs and caterpillars was lower in wetland prairie restored by planting native seed mixes and flooding annually than in degraded, unflooded prairie.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Use (1 study): One site comparison study in the USA found that wetland prairie restored by planting native seed mixes and flooding annually was used more by adult great copper than degraded, unflooded prairie.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
