3508: Install tunnels/culverts/underpasses under roads/railways
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Tunnels, culverts and underpasses may provide safe crossing points for reptiles. A range of different tunnels can be used, including purpose-built wildlife tunnels, culverts that assist with drainage and which can also be used by wildlife, and large passages beneath elevated road sections which may sometimes also be used for local vehicle access. Culverts may be round (pipes) or square (box) and may or may not have natural substrate (sand or stones) on the bottom.
Underpasses are frequently installed in conjunction with wildlife barrier fencing which funnels animals towards the tunnel and prevents them from accessing the road or railway. For this combined intervention, see Install barriers and crossing structures along roads/railways. See also Install barriers along roads/railways and Install overpasses over roads/railways.
Studies included here are those where barrier fencing is not installed or not explicitly referred to in the study methods or where at least some underpasses were in unfenced areas. Most studies here report solely on the use of these structures, such as the number of crossings made. There is an absence of studies reporting on wider population-level effects of the presence of these structures.

Key Messages:

Fifteen studies evaluated the effects of installing tunnels/culverts/underpasses under roads/railways on reptile populations. Four of the studies were in the USA, four were in Australia, three were in Spain, two were in Canada and one was in each of Australia, Europe and North America and South Africa.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Survival (3 studies): Two site comparison studies (including one before-and-after study) in Australia and South Africa found a similar number of reptile road mortalities with or without culverts or wildlife underpasses. One replicated study in Spain found that the number of underpasses in an area did not affect the number of reptile road mortalities.

BEHAVIOUR (12 STUDIES)

Use (12 studies): Six studies (including four replicated studies and one replicated, before-and-after study) and one review in Spain, Australia, the USA and Australia, Europe and North America found that crossing structures, including tunnels, culverts, underpasses, pipes and trenches under roads and railways were used by reptiles, lizards, snakes and/or tortoises. One review in Australia, Europe and North America also found that wildlife underpasses were used by reptiles in only one of 13 studies. Three of four replicated studies (including one before-and-after study) in the USA and Canada found that desert tortoises, painted and snapping turtles and rattlesnakes and garter snakes showed a willingness to enter some, or all types of tunnel. The other study found that only 9% of painted turtles entered a culvert during a choice experiment. One site comparison study in Australia found that the area under an overpass was used by five reptile species.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
