3386: Require mitigation of impacts to marshes or swamps
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Authorities may require mitigation of impacts to the environment (State of Queensland 2017) or wetlands specifically (Gardner et al. 2012; Poulin et al. 2016). For example, under the Section 404 of the Clean Water Act in the USA, a permit is required for discharging sediment into wetlands. Where possible, impacts should be avoided or minimized. Any unavoidable impacts must be compensated for (or offset) by protection, restoration or creation of wetlands elsewhere. Mitigation legislation is intended to protect the overall quantity and quality of wetlands in a region or country.
Given that mitigation requiriements typically have broad coverage, results may include other wetland habitats (e.g. peatlands and mudflats), aquatic habitats (e.g. rivers and lakes) or upland habitats (e.g. forests). Studies that include, or aim to conserve, at least some marsh or swamp habitat are summarized as evidence for this action. Where possible, specific results for marshes and swamps have been extracted.
To be summarized as evidence for this action, studies must have looked at the impact of permits on the number/area/type of wetlands created or restored in practice. Studies only looking at permits issued and mitigation required by permits are not included as evidence (although this information may be included as context for the summarized studies). Results relating to detailed characteristics of vegetation within restored/created mitigation wetlands (e.g. Balcombe et al. 2005) are summarized elsewhere on this site.
Related actions: Designate protected area involving marshes or swamps.
Balcombe C.K., Anderson J.T., Fortney R.H., Rentch J.S., Grafton W.N. & Kordek W.S. (2005) A comparison of plant communities in mitigation and reference wetlands in the mid-Appalachians. Wetlands, 25, 130–142.
Gardner, R. C., Bonells, M., Okuno, E., Zarama, J. M (2012) Avoiding, Mitigating, and Compensating For Loss and Degradation of Wetlands in National Laws and Policies. Ramsar Scientific and Technical Briefing Note No. 3. Ramsar Convention Secretariat, Gland.
Poulin M., Pellerin S., Cimon-Morin J., Lavallée S., Courchesne G. & Tendland Y. (2016) Inefficacy of wetland legislation for conserving Quebec wetlands as revealed by mapping of recent disturbances. Wetlands Ecology and Management, 24, 651–665.
State of Queensland (2017) Queensland Environmental Offsets Policy: General Guide v1.2. Available at https://environment.des.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0018/90180/offsets-policy-general-guide.pdf. Accessed 30 June 2020.

Key Messages:

Nine studies evaluated the overall effects – on vegetation or human behaviour – of requiring mitigation of impacts to marshes or swamps. All nine studies were in the USA.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall extent (6 studies): Four studies in the USA reported that requiring mitigation of impacts to wetlands did not prevent loss of wetland area: the total area restored/created was less than the area destroyed. One study in the USA reported that the total area of wetlands restored/created for mitigation was greater than the area destroyed. However, the area restored/created was smaller in most individual projects. Two of the studies reported that fewer individual wetlands were restored/created than destroyed. One before-and-after study in the USA found that wetland area declined after legislation to offset impacts came into force, but at a slower rate than before the legislation applied. Four of the studies reported discrepancies between the area of specific vegetation types restored/created vs destroyed.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE
 
VEGETATION STRUCTURE
 
OTHER

Compliance (8 studies): Eight studies, all in the USA, provided information about compliance with required mitigation. Five of the studies reported that the total area of wetlands conserved was less than the area required in permits. Three of the studies reported that most mitigation projects failed to meet targets stipulated in permits. One of the studies reported that only one of seven vegetation targets was met in all mitigation sites. One of the studies reported that 64–74% of assessed mitigation areas met success criteria stipulated in permits.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
