2715: Rotate the orientation of diamond mesh in a trawl net
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Trawl fisheries are a common type of fishing practice around the world. The codend of a trawl net is designed to retain fish and often leads to large numbers of unwanted fish being caught. This can be reduced by modifying the codend design to increase the size selectivity of the gear. One way this might be done is to change the orientation of the meshes of the net. Standard trawl codends are constructed from diamond shaped meshes. During deployment the diamond meshes close under tension and the size of the opening through which fish can escape is drastically reduced. Rotating or turning the orientation of diamond mesh involves the knots of the meshes being tied in such a way that the mesh is turned through 90 degrees to the water flow (often referred to as T90 mesh). This results in the meshes being held more open under tension and maintains a larger gap through which fish can escape. This may in turn help to reduce the catches of unwanted smaller fish.
Note: Rotated, or T90, diamond mesh is not to be confused with nets made of square mesh, which consist of diamond mesh turned through 45 degrees to the water flow to create a square shape ensuring the meshes remain almost fully open (see ‘Fishing gear modification – ‘Use a square mesh instead of a diamond mesh codend in a trawl net’.).
Evidence for a similar intervention applied to trawl nets only is summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification – ‘Use a square mesh instead of a diamond mesh codend in a trawl net’. For interventions describing the effects of different mesh types in fishing gear more generally, but including trawl nets, see ‘Fishing gear modification - Use a larger mesh size’.

Key Messages:

Six studies examined the effects of rotating the orientation of diamond mesh in a trawl net on marine fish populations. Three studies were in the Baltic Sea (Denmark), and one study was in each of the Kattegat and Skagerrak (northern Europe), the Aegean Sea (Turkey) and the North Sea (Belgium/UK). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (6 STUDIES)

Improved size-selectivity of fishing gear (6 studies): One review study in the Kattegat and Skagerrak and four of five replicated, controlled studies (one paired) in the Baltic Sea, Aegean Sea, and North Sea found that turning the orientation of diamond mesh in trawl codends by 90° resulted in better size selection of cod, red mullet and common pandora, and round-bodied fish species, but not of plaice, annular sea bream, and flatfish species, compared to standard orientation of diamond mesh in trawl codends. The other study found that turned mesh instead of standard diamond mesh trawl codends did not improve the size selectivity of cod, plaice and flounder.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
