2470: Provide supplementary food during/after release of translocated mammals
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Mammals that are translocated are especially vulnerable immediately after release. At this time, they may struggle to find natural food in an unfamiliar area. Furthermore, if the time they spend looking for food is increased, this may make them more vulnerable to predation. Hence, providing supplementary food at and after the period of release may improve longer term survival prospects.
See also: Provide supplementary food during/after release of captive-bred mammals.

Key Messages:

Sixteen studies evaluated the effects of providing supplementary food during/after release of translocated mammals. Four studies were in the UK, two were in each of the USA, France, Australia and Argentina, and one was in each of Italy, Spain, Ireland and South Africa.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (15 STUDIES)

Abundance (2 studies): A controlled study in Spain found that providing supplementary food during translocation did not increase European rabbit abundance. A study in France found that following supplementary feeding in a holding pen prior to release, a translocated deer population increased over six years.
Reproductive success (4 studies): Three studies (one replicated) in the USA, Italy and Ireland found that having been provided with supplementary food in holding pens prior to release, translocated black-tailed prairie dogs, a pair of Eurasian badgers and most female red squirrels reproduced in the wild. A study in the UK found that some translocated pine martens released from holding pens and then provided with supplementary food and nest boxes bred in the first year after release.
Survival (10 studies): Six of 10 studies (including one replicated and one controlled study) in the UK, France, Italy, Ireland, South Africa, USA, Argentina and Australia found that at sites with supplementary food in holding pens before (and in two cases after) release, translocated populations of black-tailed prairie dogs, approximately half of female roe deer and over half of red squirrels, Eurasian badgers, pine martens and released rehabilitated or captive reared giant anteaters survived for between one month and at least two years. Four studies found that at translocation release sites with provision of supplementary food, in most cases artificial refuges and in one case water, no red squirrels, rock hyraxes or burrowing bettongs survived over 2-5 months and most translocated Tipton and Heermann’s kangaroo rat spp. died within five days. A controlled study in France found that translocated European rabbits provided with supplementary food in holding pens for three days prior to release had higher female (but not male) survival rates immediately following release compared to those released directly. A controlled study in the UK found that survival of translocated and rehabilitated European hedgehogs that were provided with supplementary food after release varied with release method.
Condition (2 studies): One of three studies (including one replicated, one controlled and two before-and-after studies) in the UK and Australia found that translocated common dormice gained weight after being provided with supplementary food. One found that translocated eastern bettongs did not have increased body weights after provision of supplementary food in fenced enclosures prior to release. The other found that translocated and rehabilitated European hedgehogs provided with food after release all lost body mass, with effects varying with release method.

BEHAVIOUR (2 STUDIES)

Use (1 study): A controlled study in Australia found that supplementary feeding stations were visited by translocated burrowing bettongs.
Behaviour change (1 study): A controlled study in Argentina found that after being provided with supplementary food and kept in holding pens, released captive-bred giant anteaters were less nocturnal than wild-born rehabilitated and released individuals.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
