3715: Clear or open patches in forests
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Clearings in forests and woodland can be natural features that add diversity to the habitat. They can be created by natural events, such as mature trees falling, and maintained by grazing animals. In absence of natural clearings (such as in a younger forest) artificially removing canopy vegetation may mimic the same conditions.

Key Messages:

Six studies evaluated the effects of removing canopy to create clearings on reptile populations. Two studies were in the USA and one was in each of Sweden, Australia, the UK and France.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Australia found that rocky outcrops where trees were removed had higher reptile species richness than overgrown outcrops, and similar richness to outcrops that were naturally sun exposed.

POPULATION RESPONSE (5 STUDIES)

Abundance (4 studies): One of four replicated studies (including three controlled studies) in Sweden, Australia, the UK and the USA found that after clearings and sand patches were created, sand lizard colonized, abundance then declined, but then increased once more, larger clearings were created. One study found that more slow worms and common lizards were found in open areas of woodland maintained by vegetation cutting compared to in coppiced areas. One study found that areas with reduced canopy had more eastern Massassauga rattlesnakes in the first three years after cutting than uncut areas, but similar numbers after four years. The other study found that removing trees from rocky outcrops had mixed effects on reptile abundance.
Occupancy (1 study): One replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in France found that forest areas where the canopy had been opened up were more likely to be occupied by asper vipers than areas with closed canopy.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Behaviour change (1 study): One before-and-after study in the USA found that clearing a patch of canopy in a forest did not affect spotted turtle home range size.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
