3260: Introduce fragments of non-woody plants: freshwater wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This action involves introducing fragments of non-woody emergent plants to restore/create marshes or swamps. This includes unrooted cuttings, roots, tubers/bulbs/corms (underground storage organs), rhizomes (underground horizontal stems) or stolons/runners (above-ground horizontal stems). Vegetation fragments may be planted directly into the soil, or spread on the soil surface. Fragments may be obtained from plants raised in greenhouses/laboratories, or collected from natural sites (with potential damage to donor site; Laegdsgaard 2002).
Introduction of target vegetation might be useful in severely degraded or bare sites – which may lack remnant plants or seed banks to kick start revegetation with desirable species, and may be at risk of being taken over by undesirable species (Brown & Bedford 1997). It might also be useful in isolated wetlands, far from sources of marsh or swamp plant propagules. However, note that up-front costs can be high.
The effects of planting may be highly dependent on the environmental conditions in each study. Questions you might ask when interpreting the evidence include: Is the study site degraded? Where and when were fragments introduced? Was there any intervention to improve conditions before planting? What were the environmental conditions over the duration of the study?
The scope of this action does not include planting nurse plants; planting submerged or floating plants; planting to restore bogs, fens, fen meadows or peat swamp forests (see Taylor et al. 2018); or planting facultative wetland plants in upland sites. In contrast, the scope does include planting non-native species to conserve marshes or swamps – whilst acknowledging that this is often considered ethically unacceptable due to the risk of invasion (e.g. Ren et al. 2009).
Related actions: Directly plant whole plants; Introduce seeds or propagules; Transplant or replace blocks of vegetation; Transplant or replace wetland soil; Restore/create marshes or swamps using multiple interventions, often including planting.
Brown S.C. & Bedford B.L. (1997) Restoration of wetland vegetation with transplanted wetland soil: an experimental study. Wetlands, 17, 424–437.
Laegdsgaard P. (2002) Recovery of small denuded patches of the dominant NSW coastal saltmarsh species (Sporobolus virginicus and Sarcocornia quinqueflora) and implications for restoration using donor sites. Ecological Management & Restoration, 3, 202–206.
Ren H., Lu H., Shen W., Huang C., Guo Q., Li Z. & Jian S. (2009) Sonneratia apetala Buch.Ham in the mangrove ecosystems of China: an invasive species or restoration species? Ecological Engineering, 35, 1243–1248.
Taylor N.G., Grillas P. & Sutherland W.J. (2018) Peatland Conservation: Global Evidence for the Effects of Interventions to Conserve Peatland Vegetation. Synopses of Conservation Evidence Series. University of Cambridge, Cambridge.

Key Messages:

Five studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of introducing fragments of emergent, non-woody plants to freshwater wetlands. Three studies were in the USA. Two studies were in one marsh in Australia, but used different experimental set-ups.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (2 studies): Two replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after studies in a floodplain marsh in Australia found that plots planted with wick grass Hymenachne acutigluma had similar overall vegetation cover to unplanted plots after one year. One of the studies continued for longer, and found that planted plots had greater overall vegetation cover than unplanted plots after three years.
Herb abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in a floodplain marsh in Australia found that plots planted with wick grass Hymenachne acutigluma had similar overall sedge/grass cover to unplanted plots after one year.
Individual species abundance (4 studies): Four studies quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. For example, of two replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after studies in a floodplain marsh in Australia, one found that wick grass Hymenachne acutigluma was more frequent and had greater cover, after 1–3 years, in plots where its runners had been planted than where they had not been planted. The other study reported that wick grass cover was present, with approximately 1% cover, in 5 of 10 plots where its runners had been planted. This study monitored vegetation one year after planting.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE
 
OTHER

Germination/emergence (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in a floodplain marsh in Australia found that planting wick grass Hymenachne acutigluma had no significant effect on the germination rate of invasive mimosa Mimosa pigra over three years.
Survival (5 studies): Two replicated studies planted sedge Carex fragments into freshwater wetlands in the USA. One study reported 38–79% survival of planted tubers over one growing season, whilst the other study reported 0–73% survival of planted rhizomes after 1–9 months. One replicated study in a tidal freshwater marsh in the USA reported that 6–31% of planted California bulrush Schoenoplectus californicus rhizomes had produced shoots after three months. For two other species, all planted rhizomes died within three months. Two replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after studies in a floodplain marsh in Australia reported absence of planted wick grass Hymenachne acutigluma from 17–50% of plots after one year.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
