857: Use crop rotation
Effectiveness rating: Beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Many different measures are used to determine the health or structure of soil. Soil porosity is the volume of air in soil (or number of pores) and high porosity indicates good soil structure, as does high microbial biomass, and low penetration resistance. Often with low penetration resistance comes higher hydraulic conductivity, which is the ease with which a fluid (usually water) can move through pore spaces. Soil microbial biomass is the amount of tiny living organisms within a given area or amount of soil. Soil penetration resistance is the soil’s ability to withstand penetration by water or roots. Soil aggregates are groups of soil particles held together by moist clay, organic matter (such as roots), organic compounds (from bacteria and fungi) or fungal hyphae (long, branching structure of a fungus). Some soil particles fit closely together, some do not, creating different-sized spaces. These spaces, or pores, within and between soil aggregates can store air and water, microbes, nutrients and organic matter. Large aggregations of particles retain the most nutrients.

Key Messages:
Biodiversity: Four randomized, replicated trials from Canada, Portugal and Zambia measured the effect of including legumes in crop rotations and found the number of microbes and diversity of different soil animals increased.
Erosion: One randomized, replicated trial from Canada found that including forage crops in crop rotations reduced rainwater runoff and soil loss, and one replicated trial from Syria showed that including legumes in rotation increased water infiltration (movement of water into the soil).
Soil organic carbon: Four studies from Australia, Canada, and Denmark (including two controlled replicated trials and one replicated site comparison study), found increased soil organic carbon under crop rotation, particularly when some legumes were included.
Soil organic matter: Three of five replicated trials from Canada, Portugal and Syria (one also randomized, one also controlled and randomized), and one trial from the Philippines found increased soil organic matter, particularly when legumes were included in the rotation. One study found lower soil organic matter levels when longer crop rotations were used. One randomized, replicated study found no effect on soil particle size.
Soils covered: Clay, clay-loam, fine clay, loam, loam/silt loam, sandy clay, sandy loam, silty clay, silty loam.
 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Soil Fertility
Description: Soils Synopsis
