2664: Establish temporary fishery closures
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Like long-term fishery closures, temporary fishery closures in an area can provide relief from fishing mortality to selected species or groups of species that have suffered commercial overexploitation. Unlike long-term fishery closures, temporary closures can be seasonal (occurring in an area during a specific time) or rotational (areas alternately closed and opened to fishing). Seasonal fishery closures may typically be implemented to coincide with known periods during which fish may be more susceptible to the impacts of fishing (e.g. during breeding or spawning). During these periods, many fish species are known to aggregate into denser groups of individuals and may be made up exclusively of individuals of one sex and/or stage of maturity. Rotational fishery closures may be implemented to temporarily reduce fishing effort and mortality on the whole fish population in an area. Prohibiting some or all fishing activity temporarily in an area may protect adult breeding and spawning activity, protect immature fish during settlement and nursing, and reduce fishing mortality, potentially allowing exploited fish populations to recover over time.
Evidence for similar interventions is summarized under ‘Establish long-term fishery closures’. and ‘Protect Reproductive Individuals - Protect spawning fish from capture’.

Key Messages:

Five studies examined the effects of establishing temporary fishery closures on marine fish populations. Two studies were in the North Atlantic Ocean (Canada, UK) and one study was in each of the North Sea (UK), the Philippine Sea (Palau) and the Mediterranean Sea (Spain).

 COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Abundance (1 study): One before-and-after, site comparison study in the Atlantic Ocean found no increase in the biomass of the spawning stock of cod following a temporary fishery closure compared to fished areas over nine years.
Survival (1 study): One before-and-after, site comparison study in the Atlantic Ocean found no change in the survival of cod following a temporary fishery closure compared to fished areas over nine years.
Condition (1 study): One before-and-after, site comparison study in the Atlantic Ocean found no change in the length composition of cod following a temporary fishery closure, compared to fished areas over nine years.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Use (1 study): A study in the Northeast Atlantic Ocean reported that over five years tagged adult cod spent nearly a third of time inside a seasonally closed cod spawning area during implementation, and were thus given increased protection from any gears targeting bottom-dwelling fish during the spawning period.

OTHER (4 STUDIES)

Reduction of fishing effort (1 study): One replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in the North Sea found that fixed temporary closures had little effect on fishing effort for cod, but real-time area closures reduced the annual amount of cod caught (retained and discarded).
Commercial catch abundance (3 studies): One of two replicated (one controlled, one before-and-after) studies in the Philippine Sea and Mediterranean Sea found that during a temporary closure of a grouper fishery, spear fisher catch numbers of other fish groups (herbivores) increased, indicating they were being targeted more compared to the open season. The other study found that in targeted fisheries over 10 years, catch rates of red mullet and total catch (fish and invertebrates combined), but not European hake, increased after temporary closures, compared to before. One before-and-after, site comparison study in the Atlantic Ocean found no change over nine years in cod catches following a temporary fishery closure compared to fished areas.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
