3910: Increase or maintain the proportion of natural or semi‐natural habitat in the farmed landscape 
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
The presence of natural or semi-natural habitat within farmland may protect butterflies and moths in intensively farmed landscapes, either because the habitat itself supports remnant populations of species which cannot survive on farmland, or because it allows individuals to move through the landscape more easily, reducing isolation. For example, the presence of woodland or scrub correlates with a higher abundance of butterflies on farmland (Pywell et al. 2004).
Pywell R.F., Warman E.A., Sparks T.H., Greatorex-Davies J.N., Walker K.J., Meek W.R., Carvell C., Petit S. & Firbank L.G. (2004) Assessing habitat quality for butterflies on intensively managed arable farmland. Biological Conservation, 118, 313–325.

Key Messages:

Twelve studies evaluated the effects of increasing or maintaining the proportion of natural or semi-natural habitat in the farmed landscape on butterflies and moths. Three studies were in Switzerland, two were in each of Germany, Sweden and the UK, and one was in each of the USA, Malaysia, and New Zealand.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (11 STUDIES)

Richness/diversity (11 studies): Nine of eleven studies (including one replicated, randomized, controlled study, one before-and-after study and eight replicated, site comparison studies) in Germany, Sweden, Malaysia, Switzerland, the UK, and New Zealand found that the species richness of butterflies, burnet moths and all moths was higher on farms with a greater proportion of semi-natural habitat or with a greater proportion of woodland in the surrounding landscape, or after semi-natural habitat had been created, compared to conventional farmland or farmland with a greater proportion of arable land in the surrounding landscape. One study found that species richness of butterflies in oil palm plantations was higher where ground coverage of weeds had been maintained but similar whether or not epiphyte or fern coverage was maintained. The eleventh study found that the species richness of butterflies was similar on farms with different proportions of semi-natural habitat.

POPULATION RESPONSE (8 STUDIES)

Abundance (8 studies): Six replicated studies (including one randomized, controlled study and five site comparison studies) in Sweden, the UK, New Zealand, and Switzerland found that the abundance of butterflies and moths was higher on farms with a greater proportion of semi-natural habitat, or in semi-natural habitat compared to conventional farmland. One of two replicated, site comparison studies in the USA and Sweden found that the abundance of four out of eight species of butterflies was higher on farms surrounded by woodland, but the abundance of least skipper was lower on farms with more semi-natural habitat. The other study found that overall butterfly abundance was similar on farms surrounded by different proportions of woodland and arable land.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
