3412: Spray slurry of seed, mulch and water (‘hydroseeding’)
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Hydroseeding is a method of sowing seeds that involves spraying a slurry of seed, mulch and water over an area. Often an adhesive is added to fix the mulch and seeds onto slopes to prevent erosion. Fertilizer is also sometimes added to this mix. It is often used following construction of roads or dikes to increase vegetation cover and prevent soil erosion. The method is potentially useful in arid areas as added mulch retains moisture, potentially facilitating germination and colonization by grassland plants.

Key Messages:

Four studies examined the effects of spraying a slurry of seed, mulch and water (‘hydroseeding’) on grassland vegetation. Two studies were in Spain, one study was in the USA and one was in Italy.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY (2 STUDIES)

Overall richness/diversity (2 studies): One of two replicated, controlled studies (one of which was randomized and paired) in Spain and Italy found that hydroseeding with non-native seeds did not alter plant diversity in most cases. The other study found that hydroseeding increased plant species richness in one of two cases.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE (3 STUDIES)

Overall abundance (2 studies): One of two controlled studies (one of which was replicated, randomized and paired) in Spain found that hydroseeding with non-native seeds increased overall plant cover in most cases. The other study found that hydroseeding did not alter vegetation cover.
Sown/planted species abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the USA found that hydroseeding increased the abundance of half of the sown plant species compared to drill seeding.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE (1 STUDY)

Height (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Italy found that hydroseeding led to an increase in the height of herb species.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Grassland Conservation
Description: Grassland Synopsis
