2702: Modify fishing trap/pot configuration
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Fishing traps are a widespread traditional method for catching fish and crustacean species. They are passive gears, relying on bait or tidal currents to catch the desired species. Traps vary widely in design and are commonly in the form of portable pot- or bottle-shaped cages. However, some fishing nets are also called fish traps (e.g. fyke nets) and consist of much larger fixed or semi-fixed structures involving several sections of staked netting leading to a collecting bag/basket. The type and location of traps depends on the species being targeted. Types that target adult fish and eels (e.g. pound nets or fyke nets) or certain crustacean species like prawns/shrimps, may also catch considerable quantities of immature fish. In certain conditions (e.g. shallow estuaries in summer), trapped immature fish may die before they are released. Fish caught in crustacean traps may also suffer damage and mortality caused by the commercially targeted species. Modifications to traditional trap designs may help to prevent unwanted fish species or sizes from being retained in traps and thus reduce fish mortality.

Key Messages:

Twenty-three studies examined the effects of modifying fishing trap or pot configuration on marine fish populations. Five studies were in the Atlantic Ocean (USA, Brazil, Canary Islands, Canada). Three studies were in each of the Bothnian Sea (Sweden), the Baltic Sea (Poland, Sweden), the Tasman Sea (Australia) and the Indian Ocean (Kenya, South Africa). One study was in each of the Kattegat (Denmark), the Mediterranean Sea (Spain), the Adriatic Sea (Italy), the Southern Ocean (Australia), the Pacific Ocean (Canada) and the Barents Sea (Norway).

 COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Survival (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the Bothnian Sea found that survival of small herring escaped from a pontoon fish trap through a size-sorting grid was similar to trap-caught herring that did not pass through a grid.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (22 STUDIES)

Reduction of unwanted catch (20 studies): Sixteen of 20 replicated studies (11 controlled, one randomized, paired and controlled, one randomized and controlled, two paired and controlled and one randomized) and one before-and-after study in the Atlantic Ocean, Baltic Sea, Mediterranean Sea, Southern Ocean, Tasman Sea, Adriatic Sea, Bothnian Sea, Indian Ocean, Pacific Ocean, the Kattegat and the Barents Sea, found that modifications to trap configuration (various, including using a different trap type, increased mesh size and fitting an escape device) reduced the unwanted (undersized, discarded or non-commercial target) catches of fish (overall, or all of multiple study species), brown trout, black sea bass, herring, bluethroat wrasse and leatherjacket, cod, protected rockfishes, whitefish, black sea bass, American eel and winter flounder, sharks/rays and of salmon and rainbow trout in one of two cases, compared to unmodified conventional traps or traps of other designs. One of these also found that the number of unwanted species (fish and invertebrates) was lower in modified traps. Three other studies, found that trap modification or type had no effect on unwanted catches of white croaker, non-commercial fish or undersized Atlantic cod, and non-target haddock catches were increased. However, one of these also reported that traps (creels) did not catch high proportions of immature fish, unlike bottom trawls.
Improved size-selectivity of fishing gear (4 studies): Three of four replicated studies (two controlled and one randomized, paired and controlled) in the Baltic Sea, Tasman Sea, Indian Ocean and Atlantic Ocean found that traps or pots modified with a square mesh escape window or larger mesh sizes improved the size-selectivity of Atlantic cod, black sea bass and most fish species compared to smaller mesh and/or standard gear. The other found that increasing mesh size of a trap escape panel had no effect on size-selectivity of panga.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
