335: Manually control or remove midstorey and ground-level vegetation (including mowing, chaining, cutting etc) in forests
Effectiveness rating: Trade off between benefit and harms
Background information and definitions:
In wooded habitats, control or removal of understorey and/or midstorey vegetation may be undertaken as a deliberate conservation management practice, for example to restore previously naturally occurring open woodland conditions that have been lost due to active fire suppression and/or declining populations of large mammal grazers and browsers. In terms of bird conservation, such practice may aim to improve habitat conditions to maintain and enhance populations of individual endangered species. However, such changes may make habitat unsuitable for other species.
Many studies (especially in pine forests and savannas) simultaneously control vegetation and introduce a prescribed burning regime. These studies are described in detail in ‘Use prescribed burning’. Studies that describe the impact of mid- and understorey vegetation removal in open pine woodlands, which form a continuum with pine savannas are discussed below.
 

Key Messages:

Of fifteen studies captured, one, a replicated controlled study from the USA, found higher bird species richness in areas with midstorey thinning, compared to control areas. One study from the USA found similar bird species richness in areas with mid- and understorey control, compared to other management types. A study from Canada found fewer species in treated sites than controls.
Seven studies from Europe and the USA found that total bird densities or those of some species or guilds were higher in areas with mid- or understorey management, compared to before management or to areas without management. Four of these studies used understorey removal as part of a wider management regime.
Five studies from the USA and Canada found that densities of some species were lower in areas with midi or understorey control, or that overall bird densities did not different between managed and unmanaged areas. Two of these studies investigated several interventions at once.
A replicated controlled study from the USA found similar survival for black-chinned hummingbirds in areas with understorey management, compared to areas with other interventions. Two replicated, controlled studies from Canada found higher nest survival in forests with removal of deciduous trees, compared to controls. A controlled study found that northern bobwhite chicks had greater foraging success in areas with cleared understorey vegetation compared to burned areas, but lower than under other managements. 
A replicated, controlled study from the USA found that midstorey control did not appear to affect competition between species for nesting sites.

 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Bird Conservation
Description: Bird Synopsis
