1807: Reprofile/relandscape peatland (without planting)
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Large scale relandscaping of a degraded peatland may create a more suitable environment for vegetation growth. In particular, local moisture levels could be raised by reprofiling the peat surface into basins (removing &lt;30 cm of surface peat, and pushing this into ridges) or flat terraces (removing mounds that are too dry for colonization). Steep gully sides or eroding slopes can be reprofiled into shallower, more stable slopes.
Caution: Heavy machinery used for landscaping may churn and compress the peat soil, damaging its structure. Removing surface peat from bogs may expose fen peat, which has different chemical properties to bog peat and will not (in the short term) support bog vegetation (Lindsay & Clough 2016).
Key peatland types where this action may be appropriate: bogs, fens/fen meadows, tropical peat swamps.
Related actions: rewetting, without altering the level of the peat surface; removing upper layer of peat/soil with no other landscaping; reprofiling/relandscaping before planting.
Lindsay R.A. & Clough J. (2016) A review of the influence of ombrotrophic peat depth on the successful restoration of bog habitat. Scottish Natural Heritage Commissioned Report 925.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects of reprofiling/relandscaping peatlands (without planting) on peatland vegetation. The study was in degraded bogs (being restored as fens).
Plant community composition (1 study): One site comparison study in Canada reported that after five years, reprofiled (and rewetted) bogs contained a different plant community to nearby natural fens.
Vegetation cover (1 study): The same study reported that after five years, reprofiled (and rewetted) bogs had lower vegetation cover (Sphagnum moss, other moss and vascular plants) than nearby natural fens.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Peatland Conservation
Description: Peatland Conservation
