3264: Introduce seeds of non-woody plants: freshwater wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This action involves introducing seeds of emergent plants to restore/create marshes or swamps. Seeds may be collected from plants in greenhouses/laboratories, or from natural sites. They may be sown directly into the soil, scattered over the surface, or carried to suitable sites by water (e.g. after dropping them into the sea during an incoming tide).
Introduction of target vegetation might be useful in severely degraded or bare sites – which may lack remnant plants or seed banks to kick start revegetation with desirable species, and may be at risk of being taken over by undesirable species (Brown & Bedford 1997). It might also be useful in isolated wetlands, far from sources of marsh or swamp plant propagules. Seeds are easier to handle than plants, and can be a cost-effective way to introduce vegetation to large areas – but they can be more susceptible to herbivory or being washed away (e.g. Schoenholz et al. 2001).
The effects of sowing may be highly dependent on the environmental conditions in each study. Questions you might ask when interpreting the evidence include: Is the study site degraded? Where and when were seeds introduced? Was there any intervention to improve conditions before planting? What were the conditions over the duration of the study?
The scope of this action does not include sowing nurse plants; sowing submerged or floating plants; sowing to restore bogs, fens, fen meadows or peat swamp forests (see Taylor et al. 2018); or sowing facultative wetland plants in upland sites. In contrast, the scope does include sowing non-native species to conserve marshes or swamps – whilst acknowledging that this is often considered ethically unacceptable due to the risk of invasion (e.g. Ren et al. 2009).
Related actions: Directly plant whole plants; Introduce vegetation fragments; Transplant or replace blocks of vegetation; Transplant or replace wetland soil; Restore/create marshes or swamps using multiple interventions, often including planting.
Brown S.C. & Bedford B.L. (1997) Restoration of wetland vegetation with transplanted wetland soil: an experimental study. Wetlands, 17, 424–437.
Ren H., Lu H., Shen W., Huang C., Guo Q., Li Z. & Jian S. (2009) Sonneratia apetala Buch.Ham in the mangrove ecosystems of China: an invasive species or restoration species? Ecological Engineering, 35, 1243–1248.
Schoenholz S.H., James J.P., Kaminski R.M., Leopold B.D. & Ezell A.W. (2001) Afforestation of bottomland hardwoods in the Lower Mississippi Alluvial Valley: status and trends. Wetlands, 21, 602–613.
Taylor N.G., Grillas P. & Sutherland W.J. (2018) Peatland Conservation: Global Evidence for the Effects of Interventions to Conserve Peatland Vegetation. Synopses of Conservation Evidence Series. University of Cambridge, Cambridge.

Key Messages:

Thirteen studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of introducing seeds of emergent, non-woody plants to freshwater wetlands. Eleven studies were in the USA. Two studies were in Australia. Two of the studies were based on exactly the same set of pools. Two sets of studies in the USA and Australia used the same general sites, but different experimental set-ups.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study of created wetlands in the USA reported that wetlands sown with herb (and some shrub) seeds contained a different overall plant community to unsown wetlands, after 1–2 years.
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): The same study reported that wetlands sown with herb (and some shrub) seeds had higher plant diversity than unsown wetlands, after 1–2 years.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (4 studies): Three replicated studies (two also randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after) in wetlands in the USA and Australia found that plots sown with herb seeds (and in one study, some shrub seeds) had similar overall vegetation cover to unsown plots, after 1–3 years. One replicated, before-and-after study in the USA reported that vegetation biomass developed over 15 months after sowing mixed herb seeds. Biomass included all the sown species.
Characteristic plant abundance (3 studies): Two replicated, controlled studies of recently excavated ephemeral pools in the USA found that native, pool-characteristic species were more common, over seven years, in pools where they were sown than where they were not sown. One of the studies found that this was true when a mixture of characteristic species were densely sown, but not when a single species was sparsely sown. One replicated, before-and-after study in experimental wet basins in the USA quantified the overall density of target sedge meadow species, in the vegetation that developed over 16 weeks after sowing.
Herb abundance (2 studies): Two replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after studies in a floodplain marsh in Australia found that plots sown with herb seeds had similar overall sedge/grass cover to unsown plots, after 1–3 years.
Individual species abundance (8 studies): Eight studies quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. For example, four replicated, before-and-after studies in Australia and the USA reported that sown herb species were absent from plots in some cases, after 1–3 years. The two studies in Australia reported low abundance (&lt;20% frequency and &lt;2% cover) of wick grass Hymenachne acutigluma 1–3 years after sowing its seeds – although in one of the studies this was greater than in unsown plots.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (1 study): One replicated study in the USA reported data on cordgrass height, for up to three growing seasons after sowing.

OTHER           

Germination/emergence (4 studies): Two replicated studies in the USA reported ≤1–61% germination of grass-like plants and forbs, after their seeds were sown onto wetlands. Another replicated study in the USA reported that seeds of six wetland herb species did not germinate when sown into a floodplain where an invasive plant was present (but being controlled). One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in a floodplain marsh in Australia found that sowing herb seeds had no significant effect on the number of invasive mimosa Mimosa pigra seedlings germinating, for up to three years.
Survival (6 studies): Six studies in freshwater wetlands in Australia and the USA reported absence of sown (or planted) herb species, in at least some cases, after one month to seven years. It is not always clear whether this reflects death of seedlings or failure of seeds to germinate.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
