135: Manage ditches to benefit wildlife
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Ditch bank biodiversity is declining in agricultural landscapes and so management is required to maintain and increase species diversity. Ditch wildlife has been shown to be affected by agricultural management practices such as mowing and grazing regimes (e.g. van Strien et al. 1989) and by ditch management practices including cleaning/dredging technique, season and frequency (e.g. van Strien et al. 1991, Twisk et al. 2000, 2003).
In the Netherlands, botanical agri-environment schemes to enhance biodiversity are most commonly applied to ditch banks. Farmers are encouraged to follow the recommended management, i.e. low stocking rate, first mowing at the end of June or beginning July, no fertilization and deposition of dredging material at the high end of the ditch bank.
van Strien A.J, van Der Linden, J., Melman, T.C.P & Noordervliet, M. A. W. (1989) Factors affecting the vegetation of ditch banks in peat areas in the western Netherlands. Journal of Applied Ecology, 26, 989-1004.
van Strien A.J., van der Burg T., Rip W.J. & Strucker R.C.W. (1991) Effects of mechanical ditch management on the vegetation of ditch banks in Dutch peat areas. Journal of Applied Ecology, 28, 501– 513
Twisk W., Noordervliet M.A.W. & Ter Keurs W.J. (2000) Effects of ditch management on caddisfly, dragonfly and amphibian larvae in intensively farmed peat areas. Aquatic Ecology, 34, 397-411
Twisk W., Noordervliet M.A.W. & Ter Keurs W.J. (2003) The nature value of the ditch vegetation in peat areas in relation to farm management. Aquatic Ecology, 37, 191–209

Key Messages:
 

Five out of a total eight studies from the Netherlands and the UK (including one replicated, controlled paired study and three replicated site comparisons) looking at the effects of managing ditches on biodiversity, found that this intervention resulted in increased invertebrate biomass or abundance, plant species richness, emergent plant cover, amphibian diversity and abundance, bird visit rates and higher numbers of some bird species or positive impacts on some birds in plots with ditches managed under agri-environment schemes. 
One replicated controlled and paired study from the Netherlands found higher plant diversity on ditch banks along unsprayed edges of winter wheat compared to those sprayed with pesticides. 
Three studies from the Netherlands and the UK (including two replicated site comparisons) found that ditch management had negative or no clear effects on some farmland bird species or plants. 

 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Farmland Conservation
Description: Farmland Synopsis
