3531: Limit vessel speeds
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Turtle collisions with boats are of major concern due to the high rate of strike injury found in all species, both freshwater (Bennett & Litzgus 2014) and oceanic (Hazel et al. 2007, Denkinger et al. 2013). Establishing speed limits for watercraft in important areas has been found to benefit some aquatic animals by giving them more time to avoid collisions with approaching vessels (Nowacek et al. 2004, Laist & Shaw 2006) and may similarly benefit aquatic reptiles.
Bennett A.M. & Litzgus J.D. (2014) Injury rates of freshwater turtles on a recreational waterway in Ontario, Canada. Journal of Herpetology, 48, 262–266.
Denkinger J., Parra M., Muñoz J.P., Carrasco C., Murillo J.C., Espinosa E., Rubianes F. & Koch V. (2013) Are boat strikes a threat to sea turtles in the Galapagos Marine Reserve? Ocean & coastal management, 80, 29–35.
Hazel J., Lawler I.R., Marsh H. & Robson S. (2007) Vessel speed increases collision risk for the green turtle Chelonia mydas. Endangered Species Research, 3, 105–113.
Laist D.W. & Shaw C. (2006) Preliminary evidence that boat speed restrictions reduce deaths of Florida Manatees. Marine Mammal Science, 22, 472–479.
Nowacek S.M., Wells R.S., Owen E.C., Speakman T.R., Flamm R.O. & Nowacek D.P. (2004) Florida Manatees, Trichechus manatus latirostris, respond to approaching vessels. Biological Conservation 119, 517–523.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects of limiting vessel speeds on reptiles. One study was in each of Australia, Costa Rica and the USA.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
 
POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Survival (2 studies): One replicated, site comparison study in Costa Rica found that in waterways with enforced speed limits, fewer spectacled caiman were found dead with boat-related injuries compared to waterways with no speed limits. One replicated study in the USA found that vessels travelling at lower speeds caused fewer catastrophic injuries to artificial loggerhead turtle shells, though vessels with jet motors caused no catastrophic injuries at any speed tested.
Condition (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in Costa Rica found that in waterways with enforced speed limits, fewer spectacled caiman were found with boat-related injuries compared to waterways with no speed limits.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Behaviour change (1 study): One replicated study in Australia found that green turtles were more likely to flee from vessels travelling at lower speeds.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
