1963: Install and maintain gates at mine entrances to restrict public access
Effectiveness rating: Trade off between benefit and harms
Background information and definitions:
Gates may be installed at mine entrances to restrict public access and reduce human disturbance. However, gates can also impede access by bats and early installation attempts from the 1950s to the 1970s often resulted in roost abandonment (Tuttle 1977). For evidence relating to cave gates, see ‘Install and maintain cave gates to restrict public access’.
Tuttle M.D. (1977) Gating as a means of protecting cave dwelling bats. Pages 77–82 in: T. Aley & D. Rhodes (eds.) 1976 National Cave Management Symposium Proceedings, Speleobooks, Albuquerque, USA.

Key Messages:

Nine studies evaluated the effects of installing gates at mine entrances on bat populations. Eight studies were in the USA and one in Australia.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, before-and-after study in the USA found that fewer bat species entered mines after gates were installed.

POPULATION RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Abundance (3 studies): Two replicated, site comparison or before-and-after studies in the USA and Australia found fewer bats in mines or at mine entrances after gates were installed. One replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in the USA found that bat activity (relative abundance) remained stable or increased at five of seven gated mines, and decreased at two gated mines.

BEHAVIOUR (6 STUDIES)      

Use (2 studies): One before-and-after study in the USA found that 43 of 47 mines continued to be used 12 years after gates were installed, however bats abandoned four mines with ‘ladder’ design gates. One replicated study in the USA found that gate design and time since gate installation had varied effects on the presence of four bat species.
Behaviour change (4 studies): Four replicated, before-and-after or site comparison studies in the USA and Australia found that bats at mine entrances circled more and entered mines less after gates were installed.

OTHER (2 STUDIES)

Collisions with gates (1 study): One replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in the USA found that up to 7% of bats at mine entrances collided with mine gates.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Bat Conservation
Description: Update 2020
