3545: Establish temporary fishery closures
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Establishing temporary fishery closures in an area can remove the direct risk of reptiles being caught or entangled in fishing gear for the designated period. Examples of temporary closures might include seasonal closures, for example undertaken to protect turtles in foraging grounds, or move-on rules whereby temporary closure of a fished area occurs when a catch or by-catch threshold is reached (e.g. Dunn et al. 2014).
For other studies that investigate the effect of ceasing or prohibiting fishing see Cease or prohibit all types of fishing; Cease or prohibit commercial fishing and Limit or prohibit specific fishing methods.
Dunn D.C., Boustany A.M., Roberts J.J., Brazer E., Sanderson M., Gardner B. & Halpin P.N. (2014) Empirical move-on rules to inform fishing strategies: a New England case study. Fish and Fisheries, 15, 359–375.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the effects of establishing temporary fishery closures on reptile populations. Two studies were in the USA and one was in Brazil.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Abundance (1 study): One site comparison study in Brazil found that areas where a fishing agreement was implemented that involved seasonal fishing restrictions along with a wider set of measures had more river turtles than areas that did not implement the agreement. 
Survival (2 studies): One replicated, before-and-after study in the USA found that during seasonal closures of shrimp trawling there were fewer lethal strandings of loggerhead and Kemp’s ridley turtles. One study in the USA found that following the re-opening of a swordfish long-line fishery with turtle catch limits in place, loggerhead turtle bycatch reached the annual catch limit in two of three years, and when the limit was reached the fishery was closed for the rest of the year.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
