3914: Release captive-bred individuals to the wild
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Many species of butterfly and moth have severely declined or gone extinct in parts of their former range, particularly in areas where high rates of habitat conversion have occurred (Fox et al. 2010, Maes & Van Dyck 2001, van Swaay 1990). Given the poor dispersal ability of many species, and the highly fragmented nature of many landscapes, the transportation of individuals to suitable sites may be the only means by which a species is able to recolonize. Releases could be composed of captive-bred animals (bred from captive populations over one or more generations) or translocated animals (caught in the wild at another site, see “Translocate to re-establish populations in known or believed former range” and “Translocate to establish populations outside of known range”), and individuals at any life stage (adult, egg, caterpillar or pupa) may be used for capture and release.
Note that restoring habitat quality prior to the release of captive-bred butterflies and moths is likely to be an important factor determining the success of reintroduction projects (Schultz et al. 2008). Furthermore, for parasitic species such as the large blues Phengaris (Maculinea) spp., which rely on specific hosts (ants Myrmica spp.) for survival, the presence of a healthy population of the host species will be required at the release site.
For studies on the process of captive-breeding butterflies and moths, see “Rear declining species in captivity”.
Fox R., Warren M.S., Brereton T.M., Roy D.B. & Robinson A. (2010) A new Red List of British butterflies. Insect Conservation and Diversity­, 4, 159–172.
Maes D. & Van Dyck H. (2001) Butterfly diversity loss in Flanders (north Belgium): Europe’s worst case scenario? Biological Conservation, 99, 263–276.
Schultz C.B., Russell C. & Wynn L. (2008) Restoration, reintroduction, and captive propagation for at-risk butterflies: A review of British and American conservation efforts. Israel Journal of Ecology & Evolution, 54, 41–61.
van Swaay C.A.M. (1990) An assessment of the changes in butterfly abundance in The Netherlands during the 20th Century. Biological Conservation, 52, 287–302.

Key Messages:

Thirteen studies evaluated the effects of releasing captive-bred butterflies and moths into the wild. Nine studies were in the UK and one was in each of the UK and Ireland, the UK and the Netherlands, the USA and Poland and Slovakia.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (12 STUDIES)

Abundance (10 studies): Six studies (including one before-and-after study) in the UK, the USA and Poland and Slovakia reported that captive-bred butterfly populations released as eggs, caterpillars, pupae and adults (sometimes into managed habitat or alongside translocated individuals) persisted for 2–28 years and increased in abundance (sometimes with continued captive-rearing of wild-laid caterpillars or supplemented by further releases). Two studies (including one review) in the UK reported that captive-bred large copper and belted beauty moth populations released as caterpillars (sometimes into managed habitat) died out one, two or 12 years after release, or required further releases to survive. One replicated study in the UK reported that three of 10 captive-bred barberry carpet moth populations released as caterpillars (and in one case as adults) established, and at least one persisted for five years. One review across the UK and Ireland found that 25% of captive-bred and translocated butterfly populations survived for &gt;3 years, but 38% died out in that time, and only 8% were known to have survived for &gt;10 years.
Reproductive success (2 studies): One study in the UK reported that after the release of a captive-bred population of large copper, the number of eggs laid/female increased over the first three years. One before-and-after study in the UK reported captive-bred adult pearl-bordered fritillaries released into coppiced woodland successfully bred at least once.
Survival (3 studies): Three studies (including two replicated, site comparison studies and one review) in the UK and the UK and the Netherlands found that released, captive-bred large copper caterpillars had a lower survival rate than captive, wild or translocated caterpillars.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
