3309: Add below-ground organic matter before/after planting non-woody plants: brackish/saline wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This section involves adding organic matter (i.e. remains or waste products of living organisms) below the ground surface (i.e. by mixing it into the sediment, or placing it into holes) to areas planted with marsh or swamp vegetation.
Organic matter could increase the initial survival and/or growth rate of introduced plants, helping them to establish. Organic matter directly supplies nutrients to growing plants, supplies carbon and energy to soil organisms (which can indirectly increase nutrient availability), helps bind the soil together, retains water during dry periods, and mediates soil temperature (Donahue et al. 1983; Weil & Brady 2016). However, the soil organic matter content of wetland soils may be reduced by disturbance. For example, drainage allows oxygen into the soil, whilst reprofiling removes surface layers rich in organic matter (Bruland et al. 2006). Substances than can be used to add organic matter to wetland soils include compost, sewage sludge, wood chips and seaweed extract.
Note that many studies testing this action do not separate the effects of adding organic matter and disturbing the soil/sediment. We have included such studies, as well as those that do separate the effects of these actions with appropriate controls.
Related actions: Add below-ground organic matter, other than to complement planting; Add inorganic fertilizer before/after planting; Add surface mulch to complement planting.
Bruland G.L., Richardson C.J. & Whalen S.C. (2006) Spatial variability of denitrification potential and related soil properties in created, restored, and paired natural wetlands. Wetlands, 26, 1042–1056.
Donahue R.L., Shickluna J.C. & Robertson L.S. (1983) Soils: An Introduction to Soils and Plant Growth, Fifth Edition. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA.
Weil R.R. & Brady N.C. (2016) The Nature and Properties of Soils, Fifteenth Edition. Pearson, USA.

Key Messages:

Six studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of adding below-ground organic matter to brackish/saline wetlands planted with emergent, non-woody plants. Five studies were in the USA and one was in China. Two studies were in the same marsh, but used different experimental set-ups.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Individual species abundance (5 studies): Three replicated, randomized, controlled studies in the USA found that adding organic matter before/after planting cordgrasses Spartina spp. typically had no significant effect on cordgrass abundance (biomass and/or density) after 1–2 growing seasons. One replicated, paired, controlled study in an estuary in the USA found that mixing kelp compost into the sediment before planting California cordgrass Spartina foliosa increased its density, three growing seasons later. One replicated, controlled, before-and-after study in an estuary in China found that mixing reed debris into the sediment before sowing seablite Suaeda salsa increased its biomass, but not its density, five months later.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Individual plant size (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in an estuary in the USA found that tilling compost into plots before planting salt marsh vegetation typically increased the overall size of plants surviving after 1–2 growing seasons. Size was reported as a combination of height and lateral spread.
Height (5 studies): Four replicated, controlled studies in the USA and China found that adding organic matter before/after introducing salt marsh plants (cordgrasses Spartina spp. or seablite Suaeda salsa) had no significant effect on their height after 1–2 growing seasons. One replicated, paired, controlled study in an estuary in the USA found that mixing kelp compost into the sediment before planting California cordgrass Spartina foliosa increased its height, three growing seasons later.

OTHER

Survival (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in an estuary in the USA found that plots amended with kelp compost supported a higher survival rate of planted salt marsh vegetation over 1–2 growing seasons, with a similar but typically insignificant trend for survival rates of individual species.
Growth (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in a greenhouse in the USA found that adding alginate after planting cordgrasses had no significant effect on the average number of shoots per plant, nine weeks later.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
