3727: Translocate problem reptiles
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Some species may come into conflict with humans due to real or perceived risks of interacting with them (e.g. venomous or carnivorous reptiles) or due to nuisance behaviours. Retaliation by humans may limit the persistence of these species close to human settlements. Relocating individuals to alternative locations where the potential for interaction with humans is reduced may be desirable in situations where the alternative is euthanasia. Typically, mitigation translocations of problem individuals involve moving low numbers of animals a minimum necessary distance away from where they were collected.

Key Messages:

Seven studies evaluated the effects on reptile populations of translocating problem individuals. Two studies were in each of Australia and Canada, one was in each of the USA and Hong Kong and one was conducted across multiple countries.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (6 STUDIES)

Abundance (1 study): One global review found that when using recruitment to the adult population as a measure of success, mitigation translocations (of both problem reptiles and moving away from threats) failed more often than those carried out for conservation or research purposes.
Survival (5 studies): Two of four controlled studies (including two replicated studies) in Australia, Canada and Hong Kong found that survival of translocated problem tiger snakes and massasauga rattlesnakes was similar to resident snakes for six months or until hibernation. One study found that more translocated problem dugite snakes died within two months than resident snakes. The other study found mixed effects on survival of translocating problem white-lipped pit vipers compared to resident snakes. One controlled study in the USA found that two of seven translocated problem Gila monsters died within 1–24 months of translocation.

BEHAVIOUR (4 STUDIES)

Behaviour change (4 studies): Two controlled studies (including one replicated study) in Australia found mixed effects on movement behaviour and home range size of translocating problem tiger snakes and dugite snakes compared to resident snakes. One randomized, controlled study in Canada found that translocated massasauga rattlesnakes moved further from release points after two days than snakes released at their point of capture, but distances were similar after 18 days. One controlled study in the USA found that the home ranges of problem Gila monsters translocated &gt;1 km were similar in size to those translocated &lt;1 km.

OTHER (5 STUDIES)

Human-wildlife conflict (5 studies): Three of five controlled studies (including three replicated studies) in the USA, Australia, Canada and Hong Kong of translocations of problem Gila monsters, tiger snakes and western rattlesnakes found that at least some returned to their point of capture or moved in to adjacent suburban areas within a month. One of the studies found that while all problem Gila monsters translocated &lt;1 km returned to their point of capture, none of those translocated &gt;1 km returned. The other two studies found that no massasauga rattlesnakes or problem white-lipped pit vipers returned to their point of capture.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
