970: Prevent turbine blades from turning at low wind speeds ('feathering')
Effectiveness rating: Beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Most wind turbines operate by a ‘cut-in’ wind speed at which the turbine begins to generate electricity and the blades can move at a maximum rotation speed. However, the blades can still rotate below cut-in speeds when electricity is not being generated. Preventing wind turbine blades from turning when they are not operational (known as ‘feathering’) may reduce bat fatalities, which have been found to be higher at low wind speeds (e.g. Horn et al. 2008, Rydell et al. 2010, Wellig et al. 2018). Turbine blades may be locked or the angle of the blades may be changed to be parallel to the wind. In some cases, the blades may still move a minimal amount (e.g. 1–2 rotations/minute). The cut-in speed of wind turbines is often increased in combination with this intervention. See ‘Increase the wind speed at which turbines become operational (‘cut-in speed’)’.
Horn J.W., Arnett E.B. & Kunz T.H. (2008) Behavioral responses of bats to operating wind turbines. The Journal of Wildlife Management, 72, 123–132.
Rydell J., Bach L., Dubourg-Savage M.-J., Green M., Rodrigues L. & Hedenström A. (2010) Bat mortality at wind turbines in northwestern Europe. Acta Chiropterologica, 12, 261–274.
Wellig S.D., Nusslé S., Miltner D., Kohle O., Glaizot O., Braunisch V., Obrist M.K. & Arlettaz R. (2018) Mitigating the negative impacts of tall wind turbines on bats: vertical activity profiles and relationships to wind speed. PLOS ONE, 13, e0192493.

Key Messages:

Six studies evaluated the effects of preventing turbine blades from turning at low wind speeds on bat populations. Five studies were in the USA and one was in Canada.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (6 STUDIES)

Survival (6 studies): Five of six studies (including five replicated, controlled studies and one before-and-after study) in the USA and Canada found that preventing turbine blades from turning at low wind speeds (‘feathering’), or feathering along with increasing the wind speed at which turbines become operational (‘cut-in speed’) resulted in fewer bat fatalities than at conventionally operated turbines. The other study found that automatically feathering turbine blades at low wind speeds did not reduce bat fatalities.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Bat Conservation
Description: Update 2020
