2250: Restore coastal lagoons
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Coastal lagoons (areas of shallow, coastal salt water, wholly or partially separated from the sea by sandbanks, shingle or, less frequently, rocks) are highly biodiverse systems. They can also be connected to land water through rivers, and as such host both marine, brackish, and freshwater invertebrate species. However, coastal lagoons are highly threatened by eutrophication, pollution, urbanization, and diverse forms of modification in their watersheds, caused by high levels of human activity in the coastal zones of all continents (Esteves et al. 2008), resulting in biodiversity loss. Coastal lagoons could be restored through various means, including re-salination, hydrological modifications and algae harvesting (Ghosh et al. 2006; Lenzi et al. 2003). Restoring coastal lagoons can potentially help promote local biodiversity and recover lost or declining species of subtidal benthic invertebrates (Mohapatra et al. 2007).
 
Esteves F.A., Caliman A., Santangelo J.M., Guariento R.D., Farjalla V.F. & Bozelli R.L. (2008) Neotropical coastal lagoons: an appraisal of their biodiversity, functioning, threats and conservation management. Brazilian Journal of Biology, 68, 967–981.
Ghosh A.K., Pattnaik A.K. & Ballatore T.J. (2006) Chilika Lagoon: Restoring ecological balance and livelihoods through re‐salinization. Lakes & Reservoirs: Research & Management, 11, 239–255.
Lenzi M., Palmieri R. & Porrello S. (2003) Restoration of the eutrophic Orbetello lagoon (Tyrrhenian Sea, Italy): water quality management. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 46, 1540–1548.
Mohapatra A., Mohanty R.K., Mohanty S.K., Bhatta K.S. & Das N.R. (2007) Fisheries enhancement and biodiversity assessment of fish, prawn and mud crab in Chilika lagoon through hydrological intervention. Wetlands Ecology and Management, 15, 229–251.

Key Messages:

Three studies examined the effects restoring coastal lagoons on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations. One study was in the Chilika lagoon (India), and two in East Harbor lagoon (USA).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Crustacean richness/diversity (1 study): One before-and-after study in Chilika lagoon found that following hydrological restoration total crustacean species richness decreased, but changes varied with species groups (decreases in prawn and crab species; increases in lobster species). The lagoon also hosted new species not found before.
Mollusc richness/diversity (2 studies): Two studies in East Harbor lagoon found that following hydrological restoration molluscs recolonised the lagoon and their species richness increased in the first three years but later decreased over the following six.

POPULATION RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Crustacean abundance (1 study): One before-and-after study in Chilika lagoon found that following hydrological restoration abundances of prawns and crabs increased.
Mollusc abundance (2 studies): Two studies in East Harbor lagoon found that following hydrological restoration molluscs recolonised the lagoon and their total abundance increased in the first three years, but later decreased over the following six.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
