3405: Sow seeds at a higher density
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Grassland restoration often aims to establish grassland vegetation at a degraded site. One method of doing this is sowing the seeds of grassland plants. Increasing the density at which the seeds of grassland plants are sown may help to increase their chances of establishment.

Key Messages:

Six studies examined the effects of sowing seeds at a higher density on grassland vegetation. Four studies were in the USA, and one study was in each of the UK and Canada.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY (2 STUDIES)

Community composition (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in the UK found that sowing grass seeds at a higher density did not increase the similarity of the vegetation community to that of the target community.
Forb richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the USA found that sowing seeds at a higher density increased forb species richness.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE (4 STUDIES)

Sown/planted species abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the USA found that sowing seeds at a higher density did not alter the cover of sown plant species.
Grass abundance (3 studies): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the USA found that sowing seeds at a higher density increased grass cover.
Forb abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the USA found that sowing seeds at a higher density increased forb cover.
Tree/shrub abundance (1 study): One site comparison study in the USA found that sowing grass seeds at a higher density reduced the cover of native grassland shrubs.
Individual plant species abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in Canada found that sowing seeds at a higher density increased the cover of thickspike wheatgrass.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (1 STUDY)

Germination/Emergence (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the USA found that sowing seeds at a higher density increased the number of purple needlegrass seedlings.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Grassland Conservation
Description: Grassland Synopsis
