3687: Protect nests and nesting sites from predation using artificial nest covers: Tortoises, terrapins, side-necked & softshell turtles
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Using temporary individual nest covers may be a preferred way of protecting reptile nests when predator removal is difficult (for example due to the predator’s ecology), or when it is considered to be unethical (for example involving controls on endangered species), unpopular (for example charismatic or native predators) or too costly (Buzuleciu et al. 2015).
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians.
For studies that use fencing to exclude predators from larger areas, see Remove or control predators using fencing and/or aerial nets.
Buzuleciu S.A., Spencer M.E. & Parker S.L. (2015) Predator exclusion cage for turtle nests: a novel design. Chelonian Conservation and Biology, 14, 196–201.

Key Messages:

Seven studies evaluated the effects of protecting nests and nesting sites from predation using artificial nest covers on tortoise, terrapin, side-necked and softshell turtle populations. Five studies were in the USA and one was in each of the Galápagos and Canada.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (7 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (7 studies): Two replicated studies (including one controlled study) in the Galápagos and the USA found that Galápagos giant tortoise nests surrounded by rock-walled corrals and bog turtle nests covered with cages were predated less frequently than unprotected nests. Two replicated studies (including one randomized, controlled study) in Canada and the USA found that nests of painted and snapping turtles and bog turtles covered with cages had similar hatching success compared to nests left uncovered. One of two replicated controlled studies (including one randomized study) in Canada and the USA found that painted and snapping turtle nests protected by three different cage types were predated a similar amount. The other study found mixed effects of different cage designs on predation rate of artificial nests at a diamondback terrapin nesting site. One replicated, before-and-after study in the USA found that diamondback terrapin nests covered by a nest box with an electrified wire were predated less frequently than nests under a box with no wire. One before-and-after study in the USA found that over half of eggs from bog turtle nests covered with cages in an area grazed by cattle hatched successfully. One replicated, controlled study in the USA found that diamondback terrapin nests covered with cages had hatching success of 55–93%, and 83–100% of uncaged nests were predated.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
