3050: Use grazing to maintain or restore disturbance: freshwater marshes
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Disturbance can clear dominant plants, maintain light availability and control nutrient levels – and may maintain vegetation in a desirable and/or species-rich state (Hall et al. 2008; Middleton 2013). Therefore, conservationists sometimes want to actively restore disturbance where it has ceased, or maintain disturbance at a site where it would otherwise be lost. Grazing with animals such as sheep, horses, cattle, goats or water buffalo (Gulickx et al. 2007) might be one way to do this. Grazing can also give some economic value to wetlands, strengthening arguments against conversion to other land uses. Grazing itself may be the disturbance that has been reduced. Some wetlands have been abandoned following historical low-intensity grazing (e.g. Plassman et al. 2010).
This section includes studies evaluating the effects of grazing implemented for conservation (e.g. with species and intensity aligned with vegetation conservation goals). Studies of the impact of intense commercial grazing, for example, are not included. Bear in mind that the effects of grazing might be highly dependent on how it is carried out (e.g. species, intensity, timing, frequency and duration) and site conditions (e.g. nutrient availability, water levels, presence/density of wild herbivores) (Rinella & Hileman 2009).
Related actions: Use grazing to control problematic plants, whose success is not linked to a change in disturbance regime; Change season/timing of livestock grazing; Change type of livestock grazing.
Gulickx M.M.C., Beecroft R.C. & Green A.C. (2007) Introduction of water buffalo Bubalus bubalis to recently created wetlands at Kingfishers Bridge, Cambridgeshire, England. Conservation Evidence, 4, 43–44.
Hall S.J., Lindig-Cisneros R. & Zedler J.B. (2008) Does harvesting sustain plant diversity in Central Mexican wetlands? Wetlands, 28, 776–792.
Middleton B.A. (2013) Rediscovering traditional vegetation management in preserves: trading experiences between cultures and continents. Biological Conservation, 158, 750–760.
Plassmann K., Jones M.L.M. & Edwards-Jones G. (2010) Effects of long-term grazing management on sand dune vegetation of high conservation interest. Applied Vegetation Science, 13, 100–112.
Rinella M.J. & Hileman B.J. (2009) Efficacy of prescribed grazing depends on timing intensity and frequency. Journal of Applied Ecology, 46, 796–803.

Key Messages:

Five studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of using grazing to maintain or restore disturbance in freshwater marshes. Two studies were in the UK. There was one study in each of the Netherlands, Germany and the USA.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Community types (2 studies): One study of a riparian wet meadow in Germany reported changes in the area of plant community types over four years of grazing (after cutting trees/shrubs). One replicated, before-and-after study of dune slacks in the UK reported that the plant community type within plots remained stable over 16 years of grazing.
Community composition (3 studies): Two replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, studies in freshwater marshes/wet meadows in the UK and the USA reported that the overall plant community composition was similar in grazed and ungrazed plots after 2–9 years. One replicated study of dune slacks in the Netherlands simply reported changes in the overall plant community composition after resuming grazing (along with other interventions).
Overall richness/diversity (4 studies): Two studies (one replicated, before-and-after) in wetlands in Germany and the UK reported that after resuming grazing (and cutting trees/shrubs in one study), there were increases in total plant species richness and/or diversity. One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in the UK reported that grazing had no significant effect on overall plant species richness in wet grassland and flush vegetation: there were similar declines over nine years in grazed and ungrazed plots. One replicated study of dune slacks in the Netherlands simply quantified total plant species richness over three years after resuming grazing (along with other interventions).
Characteristic plant richness/diversity (2 studies): One replicated, before-and-after study in dune slacks in the UK reported that after resuming grazing, the number of dune-slack indicator species increased. One replicated study of dune slacks in the Netherlands simply quantified the richness of characteristic plant species – typical of dune slacks or nutrient-rich marshes – over three years after resuming grazing (along with other interventions).

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in freshwater marshes/wet meadows in the USA found that grazing typically had no significant effect on overall vegetation biomass after 1–2 years. One replicated study of dune slacks in the Netherlands simply quantified total vegetation cover over three years after resuming grazing (along with other interventions). Cover never exceeded 50%.
Herb abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in the UK reported that grazing had no significant effect on the cover of forbs or grass-like plants in wet grassland and flush vegetation: there were similar declines over nine years in grazed and ungrazed plots.
Tree/shrub abundance (1 study): One study of a riparian wet meadow in Germany reported that some trees/shrubs regrew over four years of grazing (after cutting trees/shrubs).
Bryophyte abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in the UK reported that grazing had no significant effect on bryophyte cover in wet grassland and flush vegetation: there were similar changes over nine years in grazed and ungrazed plots.
Individual species abundance (1 study): One replicated study of dune slacks in the Netherlands simply quantified the cover of individual species present over three years after resuming grazing (along with other interventions). Only two species had &gt;1% cover in any slack.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (2 studies): One site comparison study of a riparian wet meadow in Germany reported that an area grazed by cattle (after cutting trees/shrubs) contained shorter vegetation than an adjacent unmanaged area. One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in wet grassland and flush vegetation in the UK found that the maximum vegetation height was typically similar, over four years, in plots grazed by cattle and plots from which cattle were excluded.

OTHER

Survival (1 study): One study of a riparian wet meadow in Germany reported that 20% of black alder Alder glutinosa trees were still alive after being cut back and grazed for four years.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
