3385: Provide general protection for marshes or swamps
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
This action involves general protection of marshes or swamps by hard law, policy or regulation, usually at a national or international level. Conceptually, this is similar to protecting individual species, such as in the European Union Habitats Directive. In 1760, King Don José of Portugal issued an order to restrict the widespread cutting of mangroves in Brazil (FAO 2007). More recently, the Sri Lankan Environment Ministry agreed to establish legal protection for all of the country’s mangroves (Seacology 2016).
Studies that include, or aim to conserve, at least some marsh or swamp habitat are summarized as evidence for this action. Given the broad scale of this action, results may include other wetland habitats (e.g. peatlands and mudflats), aquatic habitats (e.g. rivers and lakes) or upland habitats (e.g. forests).
Related actions: Designate protected area involving marshes or swamps; Require mitigation of impacts to marshes or swamps.
FAO (2007) The World’s Mangroves 1980–2005. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome, Italy.
Seacology (2016) The Sri Lanka Mangrove Conservation Project. Seacology Report. Available at https://www.seacology.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/Sri-Lanka-prospectus-2016-web-pages.pdf. Accessed 24 July 2020.

Key Messages:

Three studies evaluated the overall effects, on vegetation or human behaviour, of providing general protection for marshes or swamps. There was one study in each of Puerto Rico, China and Canada.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall extent (3 studies): Two studies in China and Canada reported that the area of wetlands (including habitats other than marshes or swamps) in their study regions declined over 10–29 years, despite general protection of wetlands. However, in China, the decline was slower than in a previous period without protection. One before-and-after study of mangrove forests in Puerto Rico reported that their area increased following legal protection.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE
 
VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Overall structure (1 study): One before-and-after study in China reported degradation in wetland landscape structure over 29 years when wetlands were generally protected. However, the decline was slower than in a previous period when wetlands were not protected.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
