2925: Rehabilitate and release injured, sick or weak marine and freshwater mammals
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Marine and freshwater mammals that are injured, sick or found in a weak condition may be taken into captivity by wildlife rehabilitators to be treated and released back into the wild. Often this is done more for animal welfare reasons than for species conservation, although for rare species, release of such animals may provide opportunities to augment wild populations. The success of such programmes can be difficult to judge without long-term survival data or benchmark data for survival of wild mammals that have not been taken into captivity. It is also important to note that most studies summarised below have small sample sizes, and that unsuccessful attempts are unlikely to have been reported.
Evidence has been summarised below for studies that brought mammals into captivity as part of a rehabilitation programme. For interventions that treat mammals for disease or parasites in the wild or during temporary confinement, see Treat disease in wild marine and freshwater mammals and Use drugs to treat parasites. For studies that rescued and immediately released stranded or trapped mammals, see Rescue and release stranded or trapped marine and freshwater mammals.

Key Messages:

Twenty-seven studies evaluated the effects of rehabilitating and releasing injured, sick or weak marine and freshwater mammals. Nine studies were in the North Atlantic Ocean (USA, UK, France), six studies were in the North Pacific Ocean (USA), four studies were in the Gulf of Mexico (USA), two studies were in each of the North Sea (the Netherlands) and the Gulf of Maine (USA), and one study was in each of the Indian River Lagoon (USA), Bohai Bay (China), The Wash estuary (UK), water bodies in Florida (USA), El Dorado Lake (Peru), and the Gulf of California (Mexico).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (26 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (1 study): One replicated study in the North Pacific Ocean found that more than a quarter of rehabilitated and released Hawaiian monk seals reproduced.
Survival (26 studies): Twenty-one studies (including two controlled studies, four replicated studies and one review) in the North Atlantic Ocean, the Gulf of Maine, the Gulf of Mexico, the North Pacific Ocean, the Indian River Lagoon, The Wash estuary, water bodies in Florida, El Dorado Lake, and the Gulf of California found that 10–100% of dolphins, porpoises, whales, seals, sea lions and manatees released after rehabilitation in captivity survived during post-release monitoring periods, which ranged in length from three days to five years. Five studies (including one replicated study) in the North Sea, the North Atlantic Ocean, Bohai Bay and the North Pacific Ocean found that two of three harbour porpoises, 152 of 188 grey seal pups, a common seal, a west Pacific finless porpoise and 14 of 35 California sea lions were successfully rehabilitated and released but survival after release was not reported. One controlled study in the North Pacific Ocean found that at least a quarter of California sea lions treated for toxic algae poisoning and released back into the wild died or had to be euthanized.

BEHAVIOUR (3 STUDIES)

Behaviour change (3 studies): Two of three controlled studies in the North Atlantic Ocean, the North Pacific Ocean and The Wash estuary found that a harbour porpoise and six harbour seals that were rehabilitated and released had similar movements and/or behaviours to wild mammals. The other study found that California sea lions treated for toxic algae poisoning and released travelled further from the shore, spent less time diving or hauled out and made shorter, shallower dives than wild sea lions without poisoning.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
