2703: Fit escape devices (panels/grids) to encircling nets
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Encircling fishing gears consist of most types of seine nets and also encircling gillnets or ring nets. They can be deployed by hand from the shore or by boat, or by powered gear on larger vessels. Encircling gears can have very large nets, or sweep the entire water column in shallow areas, meaning that large numbers of unwanted species can be caught as well as those being fished for. Species that are not commercially valuable are often discarded or thrown back dead, resulting in unnecessary mortality (Bellido et al. 2011, Feekings et al. 2012). The use of fish escape devices in encircling nets similar to those used in trawls, such as mesh windows/panels and size-sorting grids, may allow unwanted fish of certain sizes or species to escape from the nets as they are hauled in.
For interventions describing the use of escape panels or size-sorting grids in other gear types, see ‘Fishing gear modification - Modify fishing trap/pot configuration’, ‘Fit mesh escape panels/windows to a trawl net’, ‘Fit rigid (as opposed to mesh) escape panels/windows to a trawl net’, ‘Fit a size-sorting escape grid (rigid or flexible) to a fish trawl net’ and ‘Fit a size-sorting escape grid (rigid or flexible) to a prawn/shrimp trawl net’.
Bellido J.M., Santos M.B., Pennino M.G., Valeiras X. & Pierce G.J. (2011) Fishery discards and bycatch: solutions for an ecosystem approach to fisheries management? Ecosystems and Sustainability, 670, 317–333.
Briggs R.P. (1992) An assessment of nets with a square–mesh panel as a whiting conservation tool in the Irish Sea Nephrops fishery. Fisheries Research 13, 133–152.
Feekings J., Bartolino V., Madsen N. & Catchpole T. (2012) Fishery discards: Factors affecting their variability within a demersal trawl fishery. PLoS ONE 7.

Key Messages:

Three studies examined the effect of fitting fish escape devices (panels or size-sorting grids) to encircling nets on marine fish populations. One study was in the Tasman Sea (Australia), one was in the North and Norwegian Seas (Norway) and one was in the Atlantic Ocean (Portugal). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Survival (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the North and Norwegian Seas reported no difference in the survival of saithe, but reduced survival of mackerel, between fish that had passed through a rigid size-sorting escape grid in a purse seine net and those that had not, after one month.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (2 STUDIES)

Reduction of unwanted catch (2 studies): Two replicated studies (one controlled) in the Tasman Sea and Atlantic Ocean found that transparent panels of net and a large-diamond mesh escape panel fitted to fish seine nets, reduced the catches of unwanted small individuals of one of four commercially targeted fish and unwanted or undersized fish, compared to conventional seine nets.


Improved size-selectivity of fishing gear (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the Tasman Sea found that size-selectivity of one of four commercial fish species was improved in seine nets with transparent netting panels compared to without.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
