3676: Remove or control predators by relocating them
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Predators can drive declines or local extinctions of vulnerable reptile species. Non-native predators may be a particular problem for native reptiles that lack sufficient predator avoidance behaviours.  Native predators can also threaten populations of reptiles that persist in low numbers. Predator control may attract opposition on animal welfare grounds, and therefore relocating predators may be a more favourable option in some circumstances.
Se also: Remove or control predators using fencing and/or aerial nets and Remove or control predators using lethal controls.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects on reptile populations of removing or controlling predators by relocating them. Both studies were in the USA.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Abundance (1 study): One before-and-after study in the USA found that after raccoons were live trapped and relocated, the number of freshwater turtle hatchlings increased for 2–3 years, then decreased again after 3–4 years.
Reproductive success (2 studies): One of two studies (including one replicated, controlled study) in the USA found that within a fenced area where predators were removed by both relocating and lethal controls, fewer gopher tortoise nests were predated than outside the fenced area where predators were not removed. The other study found that after raccoons were live trapped and relocated, predation of freshwater turtle nests decreased for 2–3 years, then increased again after 3–4 years.
Survival (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the USA found that within a fenced area where predators were removed by both relocating and lethal controls, survival of gopher tortoise hatchlings was higher than outside the fenced area where predators were not removed.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
