2396: Provide supplementary water to increase reproduction/survival
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
In arid environments, artificial water sources may be provided to aid survival or population expansion for species of conservation concern (e.g. West et al. 2017). This may be done as part of translocation or reintroduction programmes and also for securing existing populations of threatened species.
See also Natural system modifications - Provide artificial waterholes in dry season and Climate change & severe weather - Provide dams/water holes during drought.
West R., Ward M.J., Foster W.K. & Taggart D.A. (2017) Testing the potential for supplementary water to support the recovery and reintroduction of the black-footed rock-wallaby. Wildlife Research, 44, 269–279.

Key Messages:

Six studies evaluated the effects on mammals of providing supplementary water to increase reproduction/survival. Two studies were in Australia and one each was in Oman, Portugal, Saudi Arabia and the USA and Mexico.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (5 STUDIES)

Abundance (2 studies): A replicated study in the USA and Mexico found that providing supplementary water was associated with increases in desert bighorn sheep population size. A study in Oman found that a released captive-bred Arabian oryx population initially provided with supplementary water and food increased over 14 years.
Reproduction (2 studies): A study in Saudi Arabia found that released captive-bred Arabian gazelles initially provided with supplementary water and food after release into a fenced area started breeding in the first year. A study in Australia found that most female released captive-reared black-footed rock-wallabies provided with supplementary water after release into a large predator-free fenced area reproduced in the first two years.
Survival (2 studies): A controlled, before-and-after study in Australia found that most released captive-bred hare-wallabies provided with supplementary water, along with supplementary food and predator control, survived at least two months after release into a fenced peninsula. A study in Australia found that over half of released captive-reared black-footed rock-wallabies provided with supplementary water after release into a large predator-free fenced area survived for at least two years.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Use (1 study): A replicated study in Portugal found that artificial waterholes were used by European rabbits and stone martens.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
Description: Terrestrial Mammal Conservation
