717: Convert to organic farming
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Background information and definitions:
Organic farming is a set of actions that namely involves avoiding synthetic pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers (using organically derived chemicals and materials instead) and is often combined with different crop rotations and farming practices. Studies determining the individual effects of these actions are summarised separately for each action, but studies testing the whole suite of actions together are included here. Ground-dwelling invertebrates (such as ground beetles and spiders) are frequently surveyed using pitfall traps – small pots buried in the ground up to their rim and left empty or filled with liquid preservatives or water. Studies refer to ‘activity densities’ as pitfall trap measurements relate to both the abundance of beetles and their levels of activity on the ground (and therefore to the type of ground cover too).
This synopsis includes only those studies that experimentally tested organic farming, not those that compared existing organic systems. Experimental studies were typically conducted at laboratory, plot or field scales (17 of 19 studies presented here), but evidence for the effect of organic farming at the farm and landscapes scales (two studies here) is important and future synopses will also include comparative studies. Meta-analyses have found effects on pests and natural enemies can differ between field and farm scales (Bengtsson et al. 2005; Garratt et al. 2011).
Here we present evidence from 19 of 37 studies experimentally testing organic farming.
Additional references:
Bengtsson J., Ahnstr J.M. & Weibull A.-C. (2005) The effects of organic agriculture on biodiversity and abundance: a meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Ecology, 42, 261-269
Garratt M.P.D., Wright D.J. & Leather S.R. (2011) The effects of farming system and fertilisers on pests and natural enemies: A synthesis of current research. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, 141, 261-270

Key Messages:
This synopsis includes experimental tests of organic farming only. Comparative studies of existing organic systems are not included.
Parasitism and mortality (caused by natural enemies): One of five studies (three replicated, controlled tests and two also randomised) from Europe, North America, Asia and Australasia found that organic farming increased parasitism or natural enemy-induced mortality of pests. Two studies found mixed effects of organic farming and two randomised, replicated, controlled studies found no effect. Natural enemies: Eight of 12 studies (including six randomised, replicated, controlled tests) from Europe, North America Asia and Australasia found more natural enemies under organic farming, although seven of these found effects varied over time or between natural enemy species or groups and/or crops or management practices. Three studies (one randomised, replicated, controlled) found no or inconsistent effects on natural enemies and one study found a negative effect. Pests and diseases: One of eight studies (including five randomised, replicated, controlled tests) found that organic farming reduced pests or disease, but two studies found more pests. Three studies found mixed effects and two studies found no effect. Crop damage: One of seven studies (including five randomised, replicated, controlled tests) found less crop damage in organic fields but two studies found more. One study found a mixed response and three studies found no or inconsistent effects. Weed seed predation and weed abundance: One randomised, replicated, controlled study from the USA found mixed effects of organic farming on weed seed predation by natural enemies. Three randomised, replicated, controlled studies from the USA found more weeds in organically farmed fields, but in one of these studies this effect varied between crops and years. One study found no effect. Yield and profit: Six randomised, replicated, controlled studies measured yields and found one positive effect, one negative effect and one mixed effect, plus no or inconsistent effects in three studies. One study found net profit increased if produce received a premium, but otherwise profit decreased. Another study found a negative or no effect on profit.
 
Crops studied were apple, barley, beans, cabbage, carrot, gourd, maize, mixed vegetables, pea, pepper, safflower, soybean, tomato and wheat.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Natural Pest Control
Description: Natural Pest Control Synopsis
