2691: Release protected or species of concern alive after capture
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Releasing protected or other threatened fish species alive after incidental capture should, in theory, protect the released individuals and wider populations, particularly weaker ones, from fishing mortality and overexploitation. However, the effectiveness of live release relies on a range of factors affecting the survival of fish post-capture, including: the extent of damage from the gear, fishing duration, catch size, exposure to the air and temperature changes, depth of capture and behavioural impairments that increase the chance of predation after release (Davis 2002). In some countries where commercial fish catches are managed by quota limits, there are policies that state fish cannot be returned to the sea unless certain conditions are met, such as evidence of the species having a high likelihood of survival (Ellis et al. 2016). Survival may depend on multiple factors including species vulnerability, capture method (and depth of capture), duration of time exposed to the air and handling techniques.
For related interventions, see ‘Handling of catch’.
Davis M.W. (2002) Key principles for understanding fish bycatch discard mortality. Canadian Journal of Fisheries & Aquatic Sciences, 59, 1834–1843.
Ellis J.R., McCully Phillips S.R. & Poisson, F. (2016) A review of capture and post-release mortality of elasmobranchs. Journal of Fish Biology, 90, 653–722.

Key Messages:

Six studies examined the effects of releasing protected or species of concern alive after capture on marine fish populations. Two studies were in the Atlantic Ocean (USA and Canada), and one was in each of the Coral Sea (Australia), Tasman Sea (New Zealand), Cantabrian Sea (Spain) and the Pacific Ocean (USA). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (6 STUDIES)

Survival (6 studies): Four of six replicated studies in the Atlantic Ocean, Tasman Sea, Cantabrian Sea and the Pacific Ocean found that the majority (76–92%) of unwanted (discarded or protected) small-spotted catshark, thorny skate, pearl perch and Atlantic wolffish, but less than half of smooth skate, survived for at least 1 h–5 days after capture and/or release, and survival was reduced by hooking/capture depth injuries and longer tow durations. One study found that nearly all yelloweye rockfish survived for four days after capture and release, but canary rockfish survival decreased with increasing capture depth. The other study found that all spinetail devilrays brailed aboard from purse seine nets survived but not those brought aboard entangled in the net.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
