3809: Limit fishing activity by vessel size and/or engine power
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Overfishing leads to volumes of fish being caught that are unsustainable, both ecologically and economically, as well as to damage of fish habitats. Restriction of fishing effort or capacity may therefore help to reduce the effects of overfishing (Tidd 2013). One way to achieve this may be to limit fishing activity according to vessel size and engine power. Larger vessels typically have higher engine power and a greater ability than smaller vessels to operate or tow large and heavy fishing gear. They also have the capacity to travel further afield and for longer durations to engage in fishing activity. Restricting vessel size and engine power in an area may reduce overall fishing effort by limiting the number and type of vessels allowed to fish there. However, in some cases fishers may be permitted to respond to such restrictions by derating the power of their engines in order to continue fishing in an area rather than move out of it (Pascoe & Robinson 1998).
Pascoe S. & Robinson C. (1998) Input controls, input substitution and profit maximisation in the English Channel beam trawl fishery. Journal of Agricultural Economics, 49, 16–30.
Tidd A. (2013) Effective fishing effort indicators and their application to spatial management of mixed demersal fisheries. Fisheries Management and Ecology, 20, 377–389.

Key Messages:

One study examined the effects of limiting fishing activity by vessel size and/or engine power on marine fish populations. The study was in the North Sea (Northern Europe).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Abundance (1 study): One before-and-after study in the North Sea found that after vessels with a higher engine power were excluded from an area for half of each year there was a higher abundance of commercially targeted fish, but no difference in the overall abundance of non-commercially targeted fish over five years. In addition, for all fish, abundance was higher for two of eight size-groups.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
