2723: Fit large, supported escape openings (such as Fisheyes, Bigeyes and radial escape sections) to trawl nets
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Large, supported openings in trawl nets are catch reduction devices consisting of a large slit or hole, held open by floats and weights (e.g. Bigeye) or by supporting frames (e.g. Fisheye). They are typically used in prawn/shrimp trawls with the aim of allowing unwanted fish catch to escape while retaining the target crustacean species. Unlike other escape devices used in prawn/shrimp trawls such as size-sorting grids, these devices work by exploiting the behaviour of fish that are able to swim back and escape through the exit openings. Here, we also include radial escape sections that consist of a section of multiple large rigid openings running around the circumference of the net, because they too enable fish that can swim forward away from the codend to escape through the openings, unlike the prawns/shrimps. Use of large, supported openings in trawls potentially facilitate the escape of unwanted fish, including immature small fish, from the codend. They may also be used in addition to size-sorting escape grids to further increase the overall selectivity of the trawl net by providing another area for fish escape.
Evidence of the effect of this intervention when used in combination with another intervention to reduce unwanted catch in trawl nets is summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification - Fit a size-sorting escape grid (rigid or flexible) and large, supported escape openings to trawl nets’.

Key Messages:

Eight studies examined the effects of fitting large, supported escape openings (such as Fisheyes, Bigeyes and radial escape sections) to trawl nets on marine fish populations. Three studies were in the northwest Atlantic Ocean (USA) and three were in the Gulf of Carpentaria (Australia). One study was in the north Pacific Ocean (USA) and one was in the Coral Sea (Australia). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (8 STUDIES)

Reduction of unwanted catch (8 studies): Six of seven replicated studies (five paired and controlled, and one randomized, paired and controlled) in the Atlantic Ocean, Gulf of Carpentaria, Pacific Ocean and the Coral Sea found that fitting large, supported escape openings (various designs including Fisheyes, Bigeyes and radial escape sections) to trawl nets reduced the overall catches of unwanted fish, immature red snapper and total unwanted catch (fish and invertebrates combined) compared to standard nets. The other study found that there were fewer unwanted Chinook salmon in catches with two of two designs of escape openings, but only one of the designs caught fewer widow rockfish. One replicated, paired and controlled study in the Gulf of Carpentaria found that trawl nets fitted with either large escape openings or a square mesh escape panel reduced unwanted shark catch but not unwanted ray or sawfish catches, compared to standard nets.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
