2732: Use hook and line fishing instead of other commercial fishing methods
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Hook and line fishing involves setting fishing line in the water with baited hooks and is done by hand or using a rod and reel or longlines. In large-scale commercial and offshore fisheries, hook and line fishing usually comprises longline fishing, consisting of a long length of fishing line (up to many kilometres) with multiple branching lines with baited hooks. Longline gear may be set in the water column or on the seabed to target pelagic or demersal species. Hook and line fishing is considered more species- and size-selective than other types of fishing such as trawling (Løkkeborg & Bjordal 1992) and so may capture fewer numbers of non-target species and unwanted smaller fish. In addition, survival of unwanted fish catch may also be higher after capture by hook and line (Sureda et al. 2020) and this method of fishing may have little direct impact on the seabed and fish habitats.
Evidence for a related intervention is summarized under ‘Alternative harvesting methods - Use an alternative commercial fishing method’.
Løkkeborg S. & Bjordal Å. (1992) Species and size selectivity in longline fishing: a review. Fisheries Research, 13, 311–322.
Sureda A., Barceló C., Tejada S., Montero I., Langley E. & Box A. (2020) Physiological and survival effects of capture of red scorpion fish Scorpaena scrofa (Osteichthyes: Scorpaenidae) by different fishing gears in the Balearic Islands (Western Mediterranean). Fisheries Research, 229, 105616.

Key Messages:

Three studies examined the effects of using hook and line fishing instead of other commercial fishing methods on marine fish populations. One study was in each of the Tasman Sea (Australia), the Atlantic Ocean (Canada) and the Gulf of St. Lawrence (Canada). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Survival (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the Gulf of St. Lawrence found that fish caught by hook and line methods had greater vitality (an indicator of post-release survival) than fish caught by other gear types.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (2 STUDIES)

Reduction of unwanted catch (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the Tasman Sea found that using longlines reduced the capture of unwanted small snapper, compared to trawling.
Improved size-selectivity of fishing gear (1 study): One replicated, paired, controlled study in the Atlantic Ocean found that longlining compared to trawling, increased the size selectivity of cod and haddock at larger hook sizes only.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
