3812: Introduce catch shares
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Catch share is a fishery management system that allocates harvest rights to individuals or communities. The system has developed over the years, and it may now be described as falling into two main types: quota- and area-based catch shares. Quota-based systems set a species or fishery-wide catch limit (or in some cases fishing effort limit), a portion of which is assigned to individuals or groups for harvest. Participants are directly accountable for staying within the limits. Area-based systems allocate participants an exclusive privilege to harvest a specific area. Combinations of catch share systems may also be employed. This intervention covers any evidence of fisheries managed by catch shares where the type is not specified, and/or the measures are mixed. Introducing catch shares may limit fishing effort and mortality and help ensure sustainability by reducing effects of overfishing.
Evidence for related interventions is summarized under ‘Introduce an overall catch limit (quota cap or total allowable catch) by fishery or fleet’, ‘Set catch shares by area’ and Set catch shares by species‘.

Key Messages:

Two studies examined the effects of introducing catch shares on marine fish populations. Both were reviews of fisheries worldwide.

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Abundance (2 studies): One of two worldwide systematic reviews found that fisheries or stocks managed under catch shares were more likely to meet management target levels for biomass sustainability than those that did not meet targets. The other study found there was no difference in performance of biomass-based management targets between fisheries under catch shares, fleet-wide catch caps or fishing effort controls.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (2 studies)

Stock status (2 studies): Two worldwide systematic reviews found that catch share fisheries had lower rates of over-exploitation compared to non-catch share fisheries, and a higher proportion of fisheries managed under catch shares either met or exceeded management target levels for rates of exploitation than those that did not meet targets.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
