2710: Use a different twine type in a trawl net
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Although many commercial fishers must abide to set rules around the size of mesh they can use in their trawls, altering the thickness of mesh twine can impact the effectiveness of the mesh size. A thin twine allows the mesh to be more flexible which might help more fish smaller than the mesh opening to escape when forcing themselves against the trawl (Lowry & Robertson 1996) but the thinner twine might be weaker against heavy catch loads. A thick twine creates a more rigid, strong mesh (Lowry & Robertson 1996). It is believed that this thicker twine could present a greater visual barrier to fish which might discourage them from escape attempts.
Evidence for similar interventions is summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification - Modify the design or configuration of trawl gear (mixed measures)’. See also, ‘Use a larger mesh size’.
Lowry N. & Robertson J.H.B. (1996) The effect of twine thickness on cod-end selectivity of trawls for haddock in the North Sea. Fisheries Research, 26, 353–363.

Key Messages:

Five studies examined the effects of using a different twine type in a trawl net on marine fish populations. Two studies were in each of the North Sea (UK) and the Western Baltic Sea (Denmark/Germany), and one study was in the Adriatic Sea (Italy).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (5 STUDIES)

Improved size-selectivity of fishing gear (5 studies): Four of five replicated studies (four controlled) in the North Sea, Baltic Sea and Adriatic Sea found that using a different twine type (twine thickness and construction material) improved the size-selectivity of bottom fish, haddock, Atlantic cod, plaice and flounder, compared to thinner or other twine materials. One study found that selectivity of non-target haddock and plaice was similar for three different twine diameters. One of these studies also found that size-selectivity of fish was influenced by twine number and mesh orientation, while another found no effect of twine number and mesh orientation, but cod selectivity increased with a smaller codend circumference.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
