2707: Modify the design or configuration of trawl doors
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Background information and definitions:
Trawling is a method of fishing that involves pulling a fishing net (trawl) through the water behind one or more vessels. Trawl doors are large wooden boards or metal plates (otter boards) attached to the mouth of the trawl net by “bridles” and keep the mouth of the trawl net open as it is pulled through the water. As they are towed through the water, trawl doors and the attached bridle system cause physical damage to the seabed and herd fish into the path of the trawl (Dickson 1993). The design of trawl doors can be modified, for instance by using smaller otter boards, mounting otter boards on a sled, or changing the angle of towing attack, to reduce sediment penetration. Reducing physical contact with the seabed, and therefore sediment penetration, may reduce the herding effect of the doors and bridles and the amount of unwanted fish that move into the path of the trawl gear.
For related interventions describing other modifications to the overall design of different types or parts of trawl gear is summarized under ‘Fishing gear modification - Modify the design or configuration of trawl gear (mixed measures)’, ‘Change the size of the main body of a trawl net’, ‘Decrease the circumference or diameter of the codend of a trawl net’, ‘Modify a bottom trawl to raise parts of the gear off the seabed during fishing’ and ‘Modify design or arrangement of tickler chains/chain mats in a bottom trawl’.
Dickson W. (1993) Estimation of the capture efficiency of trawl gear. II: Testing a theoretical model. Fisheries Research, 16, 255–272.

Key Messages:

Three studies examined the effects of modifying the design or configuration of trawl doors on marine fish populations. One study was in the Tasman Sea, one in the Clarence Estuary and one in Lake Wooloweyah (all in Australia). 

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (3 STUDIES)

Reduction in unwanted catch (3 studies): Three replicated, controlled studies (one paired) in the Tasman Sea, the Clarence Estuary and Lake Wooloweyah found that modified or different designs of trawl doors caught similar amounts of unwanted fish overall, compared to conventional door types. However, one study found fewer of one of five individual unwanted fish species were caught with modified doors.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine Fish Conservation
Description: 
