3944: Employ areas of semi-natural habitat for rough grazing (includes salt marsh, lowland heath, bog, fen) 
Effectiveness rating: Awaiting assessment
Key Messages:

Nine studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of employing areas of semi-natural habitat for rough grazing. Three studies were in Germany, two were in each of the UK and the Netherlands, and one was in each of China and Canada.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (5 STUDIES)

Community composition (1 study): One controlled study in Germany found that after 16–18 years of sheep grazing, lightly grazed and ungrazed saltmarshes had a different community of micro-moths to heavily grazed saltmarsh.
Richness/diversity (4 studies): Two replicated, site comparison studies (including one paired study) in the Netherlands and Canada found that calcareous coastal dunes and shrubsteppe managed by cattle or pony grazing for 4–13 or 6–40 years had a similar species richness of butterflies (in one case combined with all pollinators) to unmanaged land or dunes managed by cutting. One controlled study in Germany found that saltmarsh managed by light sheep grazing for 15–18 years had a greater species richness of micro-moths than moderately or heavily grazed marsh, but a similar species richness to ungrazed marsh. One replicated, site comparison study in the UK found that upland rough grassland managed by livestock grazing had a greater species richness of butterflies than permanently or partially grazed improved grassland.

POPULATION RESPONSE (7 STUDIES)

Abundance (7 studies): Two of four studies (including two controlled studies, one before-and-after study and two site comparison studies) in the UK, the Netherlands, China and Canada found that fenland and calcareous coastal dunes managed by cattle or pony grazing for two or 4–13 years had a higher abundance of large copper eggs and four of 13 species of butterfly than unmanaged land or dunes managed by cutting. One study found that meadow steppe grazed by cattle, goats or sheep for 1–5 years had a lower abundance of butterflies and moths than ungrazed steppe. The fourth study found that shrubsteppe grazed by cattle for 6–40 years had a similar abundance of pollinators (including butterflies) to ungrazed shrubsteppe. Two controlled studies (including one replicated, paired study) in Germany found that saltmarsh managed by light sheep grazing for 15–18 or 19–22 years had a higher total abundance of micro-moths, and of two out of seven caterpillars, than moderately or heavily grazed, or ungrazed marsh. However, one of these studies also reported that the abundance of four other caterpillars was lower in lightly or heavily grazed marsh than in ungrazed marsh. One replicated, site comparison study in the UK found that upland rough grassland managed by livestock grazing had a higher abundance of butterflies than permanently or partially grazed improved grassland.

BEHAVIOUR (2 STUDIES)

Use (2 studies): Two replicated, site comparison studies in the Netherlands found that calcareous coastal dunes and heathland managed by cattle or pony, or year-round horse and sheep, grazing for five or 4–13 years were more likely to be occupied by brown argus and Alcon large blue than unmanaged land or habitat managed by cutting, grazing and sod cutting, or summer-only cattle and sheep grazing.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
