3854: Restore or maintain species-rich grassland along road/railway verges 
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Key Messages:

Eight studies evaluated the effects on butterflies and moths of restoring or maintaining species-rich grassland along road or railway verges. Three studies were in the USA and one was in each of Germany, the UK, Finland, Poland, and Canada.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (6 STUDIES)

Richness/diversity (6 studies): Four replicated, site comparison studies (including one paired study) in Germany, the UK, the USA and Finland found that restored roadside prairies, verges sown with native wildflowers, with more butterfly species’ larval food plants, with more species of plants and with more plants in flower had a higher species richness and diversity of butterflies, day-flying moths, burnet moths and meadow-specialist moths than verges dominated by non-native vegetation or with fewer butterfly species’ larval food plants, fewer plant species, and fewer plants in flower. However, one of these studies also found that verges sown with more plant species did not have higher species richness of meadow-specialist butterflies. One replicated, site comparison study in Canada found that road verges and land under power lines managed by mowing once or twice a year, or not at all, had a similar species richness of butterflies to remnant prairies. One replicated, site comparison study in Poland found that wide road verges had a higher species richness of butterflies than narrow road verges.

POPULATION RESPONSE (7 STUDIES)

Abundance (5 studies): Two of three replicated, site comparison studies (including one paired study) in the UK, the USA and Finland found that restored roadside prairies and verges sown with more butterfly species’ larval food plants had a greater abundance of butterflies and burnet moths than verges dominated by non-native vegetation or with fewer butterfly species’ larval food plants. However, one of these studies also found that verges with more plants in flower did not have a greater abundance of butterflies and burnet moths than verges with fewer plants in flower. The other study found that verges sown with more plant species did not have a greater abundance of meadow-specialist butterflies or moths. One replicated, site comparison study in Canada found that road verges and land under power lines managed by mowing once or twice a year, or not at all, had a similar abundance of butterflies to remnant prairies. One replicated, site comparison study in Poland found that wide road verges had a greater abundance of butterflies than narrow road verges.
Survival (3 studies): One of two replicated, site comparison studies (including one paired study) in the USA found that restored prairie road verges had a lower mortality risk for butterflies than verges dominated by non-native grasses. The other study found more dead butterflies and moths on roads with tall meadow verges than on roads with frequently mown, non-native, short grass verges or wooded verges. This study also found more dead butterflies and moths on roads with habitat in the central reservation than on roads without habitat in the central reservation. One replicated, site comparison study in Poland found that less frequently mown road verges, and verges mown later in the summer, had fewer dead butterflies than verges which were mown more frequently or earlier in the summer.
Condition (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that monarch caterpillars living on road verges mown once or twice a year had a similar number of parasites to caterpillars living in mown and unmown prairies.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Butterfly and Moth Conservation
Description: Butterfly and Moth Synopsis
