1943: Manage hedges to benefit bats
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Hedgerows on farms may be subject to various management practices, including cutting. However, there is evidence that bats prefer taller, wider, structurally diverse hedgerows and those with emergent trees (e.g. Boughey et al. 2011, Lacoeuilhe et al. 2016). Reducing the cutting frequency of hedges, planting trees within hedges, retaining and maintaining existing emergent trees, minimising pesticide use and filling gaps within hedges are all likely to benefit bats. For studies that may carry out this intervention alongside other interventions to benefit bats on farmland, see ‘Pay farmers to cover the costs of conservation measures (e.g. agri-environment schemes)’.
Boughey K.L., Lake I.R., Haysom K.A. & Dolman P.M. (2011) Improving the biodiversity benefits of hedgerows: how physical characteristics and the proximity of foraging habitat affect the use of linear features by bats. Biological Conservation, 144, 1790–1798.
Lacoeuilhe A., Machon N., Julien J.-F. & Kerbiriou C. (2016) Effects of hedgerows on bats and bush crickets at different spatial scales. Acta Oecologica, 71, 61–72.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects of managing hedges to benefit bat populations. Both studies were in the UK.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the UK found that hedges trimmed ≥3 years prior had more bat species recorded along them than hedges trimmed during the previous winter.

POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Abundance (2 studies): One replicated, paired sites study in the UK found that pipistrelle activity (relative abundance) did not differ between hedges managed for wildlife on agri-environment scheme farms and hedges on conventional farms. One replicated, site comparison study in the UK found that hedges trimmed ≥3 years prior had higher activity of two of eight bat species/species groups than hedges trimmed during the previous winter.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Bat Conservation
Description: Update 2020
