3427: Add fertilizer to soil before or after seeding/planting
Effectiveness rating: Evidence not assessed
Key Messages:

Seventeen studies examined the effects of adding fertilizer to soil before or after seeding/planting on grassland vegetation. Nine studies were in North America, six studies were in Europe, one study was in China, and one was in Brazil.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY (3 STUDIES)

Overall richness/diversity (3 studies): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in Spain found that adding fertilizer alongside sowing of non-native plant seeds increased plant diversity in 40% of cases. Two replicated, controlled studies in Spain and Italy found that plant species richness and diversity were not altered by organic matter or fertilizer addition alongside seeding.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE (13 STUDIES)

Overall abundance (8 studies): Six of nine replicated, controlled studies (five of which were also randomized and paired) in North America and Europe found that adding fertilizer alongside sowing or planting increased vegetation cover in all or some cases. Three studies found no change in vegetation cover or plant density.
Characteristic plant abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the UK found that adding fertilizer and sowing seeds increased the abundance of specialist grassland species.
Sown/planted species abundance (3 studies): Two replicated, randomized, controlled studies in the USA found that adding fertilizer after sowing seeds did not alter the density of sown forbs. One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in the USA found that adding fertilizer after sowing seeds increased the cover but not the density of four sown plant species.
Grass abundance (1 study): One replicated, controlled study in the USA found that adding fertilizer and sowing seeds increased the biomass of three native grass species.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (4 STUDIES) 

Germination/Emergence (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in China found that adding fertilizer and sowing seeds did not increase seedling emergence or density.
Survival (3 studies): Three replicated, controlled, paired studies (one of which was randomized) in the UK, China and Brazil found that adding fertilizer alongside sowing seeds did not alter the survival of seedlings.
Growth (1 study): One replicated, randomized, controlled study in the USA found that adding fertilizer after planting native prairie plants reduced the diameter of prairie lupine plants and did not alter the growth of six other plant species.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Grassland Conservation
Description: Grassland Synopsis
