3260: Introduce fragments of non-woody plants: freshwater wetlands
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Key Messages:

Five studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of introducing fragments of emergent, non-woody plants to freshwater wetlands. Three studies were in the USA. Two studies were in one marsh in Australia, but used different experimental set-ups.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY
 
VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (2 studies): Two replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after studies in a floodplain marsh in Australia found that plots planted with wick grass Hymenachne acutigluma had similar overall vegetation cover to unplanted plots after one year. One of the studies continued for longer, and found that planted plots had greater overall vegetation cover than unplanted plots after three years.
Herb abundance (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after study in a floodplain marsh in Australia found that plots planted with wick grass Hymenachne acutigluma had similar overall sedge/grass cover to unplanted plots after one year.
Individual species abundance (4 studies): Four studies quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. For example, of two replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after studies in a floodplain marsh in Australia, one found that wick grass Hymenachne acutigluma was more frequent and had greater cover, after 1–3 years, in plots where its runners had been planted than where they had not been planted. The other study reported that wick grass cover was present, with approximately 1% cover, in 5 of 10 plots where its runners had been planted. This study monitored vegetation one year after planting.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE
 
OTHER

Germination/emergence (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in a floodplain marsh in Australia found that planting wick grass Hymenachne acutigluma had no significant effect on the germination rate of invasive mimosa Mimosa pigra over three years.
Survival (5 studies): Two replicated studies planted sedge Carex fragments into freshwater wetlands in the USA. One study reported 38–79% survival of planted tubers over one growing season, whilst the other study reported 0–73% survival of planted rhizomes after 1–9 months. One replicated study in a tidal freshwater marsh in the USA reported that 6–31% of planted California bulrush Schoenoplectus californicus rhizomes had produced shoots after three months. For two other species, all planted rhizomes died within three months. Two replicated, randomized, paired, controlled, before-and-after studies in a floodplain marsh in Australia reported absence of planted wick grass Hymenachne acutigluma from 17–50% of plots after one year.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
