2266: Transplant/release captive-bred or hatchery-reared species - Transplant/release crustaceans
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Key Messages:

Five studies examined the effects of transplanting or releasing hatchery-reared crustacean species on their wild populations. Four examined lobsters in the North Sea (Germany, Norway, UK), and one examined prawns in the Swan-Canning Estuary (Australia).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (5 STUDIES)

Crustacean abundance (1 study): One study in the Swan-Canning Estuary  found that after releasing hatchery-reared prawn larvae into the wild, the abundance of egg-bearing female prawns increased.
Crustacean reproductive success (3 studies): Two studies (one controlled) in the North Sea found that after their release, recaptured hatchery-reared female lobsters carried eggs, and the number, size and developmental stage of eggs were similar to that of wild females. One study in the Swan-Canning Estuary  found that after releasing hatchery-reared prawn larvae into the wild the overall population fecundity (egg production/area) increased.
Crustacean survival (2 studies): Two studies in the North Sea found that 50–84% and 32–39% of hatchery-reared lobsters survived in the wild after release, up to eight and up to five years, respectively.
Crustacean condition (4 studies): Two studies in the North Sea found that hatchery-reared lobsters grew in the wild after release. One controlled study in the North Sea found that after release into the wild, hatchery-reared female lobsters had similar growth rates as wild females. One study in the North Sea found that after releasing hatchery-reared lobsters, no recaptured lobsters displayed signs of “Black Spot” disease, and 95% had developed a crusher-claw. One study in the Swan-Canning Estuary  found that after releasing hatchery-reared prawn larvae into the wild, the size of egg-bearing female prawns increased.

BEHAVIOUR (1 STUDY)

Crustacean movement (1 study): One controlled study in the North Sea found that after release into the wild, hatchery-reared female lobsters had similar movement patterns as wild females.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
