3231: Add sediment: brackish/salt marshes
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Key Messages:

Five studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of adding sediment to existing brackish/salt marshes. All five studies were in the USA. Two studies were based on one experimental set-up and two studies were based on another.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Relative abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that salt marshes amended with sediment typically supported a greater relative abundance of smooth cordgrass Spartina alterniflora than degraded marshes after two years, but that this typically remained lower than in natural marshes.
Overall richness/diversity (1 study): The same study found that salt marshes amended with sediment typically had greater plant species richness than degraded marshes, and statistically similar richness to natural marshes, after two years.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that salt marshes amended with sediment typically had greater total vegetation cover than degraded marshes, and statistically similar cover to natural marshes, after two years.
Individual species abundance (4 studies): Four studies quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species. For example, all four studies (including two replicated, randomized, paired, controlled) of salt marshes in the USA found that adding sediment typically increased the abundance of smooth cordgrass Spartina alterniflora, over approximately 1–5 years. This is based on total biomass, density and/or cover. One of the studies reported that adding sediment increased the cover of three other species after one year.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (1 study): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in a salt marsh in the USA found that the height of the dominant plant species, smooth cordgrass Spartina alterniflora, did not significantly differ between plots amended with sediment and unamended plots. Height was measured 16 months after sediment amendment began.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
