3056: Use prescribed fire to maintain or restore disturbance: freshwater swamps
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of using prescribed fire to maintain or restore disturbance in freshwater swamps. Both studies were in the USA.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Tree/shrub richness/diversity (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the USA found that shrub-dominated wetlands burned every three years contained fewer species of mature tree than unburned wetlands, but a similar number of shrub and sapling species.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study of bottomland swamps in the USA found that swamps burned every 2–3 years had a similar overall density of midstory and understory vegetation to unburned swamps.
Herb abundance (2 studies): One replicated, site comparison study of shrub-dominated wetlands in the USA found that wetlands burned every three years had greater cover of grasses than unburned wetlands, but statistically similar cover of forbs and ferns. Another replicated, site comparison study of bottomland swamps in the USA found that swamps burned every 2–3 years had a similar density of understory grasses to unburned swamps.
Tree/shrub abundance (2 studies): One replicated, site comparison study of shrub-dominated wetlands in the USA found that wetlands burned every three years had greater cover of shrubs than unburned wetlands. Another replicated, site comparison study of bottomland swamps in the USA found that swamps burned every 2–3 years had a similar density of shrubs, vines and other woody plants to unburned swamps.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Height (2 studies): One replicated, site comparison study of bottomland swamps in the USA found that swamps burned every 2–3 years had a shorter tree canopy than unburned swamps – but a similar-height midstory and understory. Another replicated, site comparison study of shrub-dominated wetlands in the USA found that the tree canopy was a similar height in wetlands burned every three years and unburned wetlands.
Basal area (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study of bottomland swamps in the USA found that swamps burned every 2–3 years had a similar basal area of trees to unburned swamps.
Canopy cover (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study of shrub-dominated wetlands in the USA found that wetlands burned every three years had less canopy cover than unburned wetlands.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
