3116: Use prescribed fire to control problematic plants: freshwater marshes
Effectiveness rating: Trade off between benefit and harms
Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of using prescribed fire to control problematic plants in freshwater marshes. Two studies were in the USA. There was one study in each of Australia and Costa Rica.

VEGETATION COMMUNITY

Overall extent (1 study): One controlled, before-and-after study in a freshwater marsh in Costa Rica reported that burning (and physically damaging) cattail stands reduced the area of live vegetation present 5–22 months later.
Overall richness/diversity (2 studies): One controlled study in a freshwater marsh in Costa Rica found that plots in which cattail stands were managed (burned and physically damaged) had greater overall plant species richness than unmanaged plots, 11–22 months after intervention. One replicated, randomized, controlled study in a marsh in the USA found that the effect of prescribed burning on plant species richness in the following autumn depended on the season of burning.

VEGETATION ABUNDANCE

Overall abundance (2 studies): One controlled, before-and-after study in a freshwater marsh in Costa Rica reported that burning (and physically damaging) cattail stands reduced live vegetation cover 5–22 months later. One replicated, randomized, controlled study in a marsh in the USA found that the effect of prescribed burning on overall vegetation cover in the following autumn depended on the season of burning.
Herb abundance (1 study): One study of a floodplain marsh in Australia simply reported grass/sedge cover for up to four years after burning mimosa-invaded vegetation (along with other interventions).
Native/non-target abundance (2 studies): One replicated, randomized, paired, controlled study in canarygrass-invaded wet meadows in the USA found that prescribed burning had no significant effect on the biomass of plants other than the invasive species, 2–3 growing seasons later. One study of a floodplain marsh in Australia simply reported non-target vegetation cover for up to four years after burning mimosa-invaded vegetation (along with other interventions).
Individual species abundance (1 study): One study quantified the effect of this action on the abundance of individual plant species, other than the species being controlled. The replicated, randomized, controlled study in a marsh in the USA found that the effect of prescribed burning on the cover of dominant species in the following autumn depended on the season of burning.

VEGETATION STRUCTURE

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
