2176: Add chemicals or minerals to sediments to remove or neutralise pollutants
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Marine sediments can accumulate pollutants over time, such as those leaching from aquaculture systems, sewage outfalls, or nearby agriculture fields, and negatively affect subtidal benthic invertebrates. Chemicals or minerals can be added to sediments to reduce or remove pollutants within the sediments (Shin & Kim 2016; Yamamoto et al. 2013). For example, granulated coal ash can be used with the aim of reducing concentrations of phosphates and hydrogen sulphide (Kim et al. 2014). This may reduce pollution levels in the sediment at the treated area and allow subtidal benthic invertebrate communities to recover over time (Kim et al. 2014).
 
Kim K., Hibino T., Yamamoto T., Hayakawa S., Mito Y., Nakamoto K. & Lee I.C. (2014) Field experiments on remediation of coastal sediments using granulated coal ash. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 83, 132–137.
Shin W. & Kim Y.K. (2016) Stabilization of heavy metal contaminated marine sediments with red mud and apatite composite. Journal of Soils and Sediments, 16, 726–735.
Yamamoto, T., Harada, K., Kim, K.H., Asaoka, S., & Yoshioka, I. (2013) Suppression of phosphate release from coastal sediments using granulated coal ash. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science, 116, 41–49.

Key Messages:

Two studies examined the effects of adding chemicals or minerals to sediments to remove or neutralise pollutants on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations. Both studies evaluated the use of coal ash in Hiroshima Bay (Japan).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Overall richness/diversity (1 study): One controlled, before-and-after study in Hiroshima Bay found that adding coal ash increased invertebrate species richness in winter but not summer compared to untreated sites.

POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Overall abundance (2 studies): One controlled, before-and-after study in Hiroshima Bay found that adding coal ash increased invertebrate abundance in winter but not summer compared to untreated sites. One controlled study in Hiroshima Bay found that one of two types of coal ash increased combined invertebrate and fish abundance, but not biomass.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
