2240: Designate a Marine Protected Area and prohibit aquaculture activity
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Aquaculture systems can negatively impact subtidal benthic invertebrate communities through pollution and diminished water quality (Wu et al. 1994). Ceasing or prohibiting aquaculture activity in an area, for instance following relocation to a different area or following decommissioning, would remove the source of harm and potentially allow for subtidal benthic invertebrate communities to recover over time (Johannessen et al. 1994). Specific areas can be designated as protected, and specific management measures taken to prohibit aquaculture (Lin et al. 2009). Inside protected areas where this activity is prohibited, the threat to subtidal invertebrate communities is removed, and previously impacted populations are, in theory, able to recover over time.
When this intervention occurred outside of a marine protected area, evidence has been summarised under “Threat: Pollution – Cease or prohibit aquaculture activity”.
 
Johannessen P., Botnen H. & Tvedten Ø.F. (1994) Macrobenthos: before, during and after a fish farm. Aquaculture Research, 25, 55–66
Lin H.J., Shao K.T., Hsieh H.L., Lo W.T. & Dai X.X. (2009) The effects of system-scale removal of oyster-culture racks from Tapong Bay, southwestern Taiwan: model exploration and comparison with field observations. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 66, 797–810.
Wu R.S.S., Lam K.S., MacKay D.W., Lau T.C. & Yam V. (1994) Impact of marine fish farming on water quality and bottom sediment: A case study in the sub-tropical environment. Marine Environmental Research, 38, 115–145.

Key Messages:

One study examined the effects of prohibiting aquaculture activity in a protected area on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations. The study was in Tapong Bay lagoon (Taiwan).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Crustacean abundance (1 study): One before-and-after study in Tapong Bay lagoon found that two and a half years after removing oyster aquaculture in a marine protected area, the biomasses of amphipods and shrimps had decreased, and that the biomass of crabs had not changed.
Mollusc abundance (1 study): One before-and-after study in Tapong Bay lagoon found that two and a half years after removing oyster aquaculture in a marine protected area, the biomasses of gastropods and bivalves had decreased.
Worm abundance (1 study): One before-and-after study in Tapong Bay lagoon found that two and a half years after removing oyster aquaculture in a marine protected area, the biomass of polychaete worms had stayed the same.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
