2097: Cease or prohibit commercial fishing
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
Commercial fishing is one of the most wide-spread human impacts on the marine benthic environment (Thrush et al. 1998). It can impact subtidal benthic invertebrates through species removal or habitat damage and disturbance from fishing gear such towed trawls and dredges coming into contact with the seabed (Collie et al. 2000; Watling & Norse 1998). Ceasing or prohibiting commercial fishing in an area, but allowing other types of fishing (for instance recreational fishing, or for research purposes), can remove the most intense direct pressure on subtidal benthic invertebrates, and previously impacted populations are, in theory, able to recover over time (Hiddink et al. 2017; Kaiser et al. 2006). However, species and populations are still subjected to the effects of other fishing activities. When this intervention occurs within a protected area, evidence has been summarised under “Habitat protection – Designate a Marine Protected Area and prohibit commercial fishing”. Evidence for related interventions is summarised under “Threat: Biological resource use – Cease or prohibit all towed (mobile) fishing gear”, “Cease or prohibit bottom trawling” and “Cease or prohibit dredging”.
 
Collie J.S., Hall S.J., Kaiser M.J. & Poiner I.R. (2000) A quantitative analysis of fishing impacts on shelf‐sea benthos. Journal of Animal Ecology, 69, 785–798.
Hiddink J.G., Jennings S., Sciberras M., Szostek C.L., Hughes K.M., Ellis N., Rijnsdorp A.D., McConnaughey R.A., Mazor T., Hilborn R. & Collie J.S. (2017) Global analysis of depletion and recovery of seabed biota after bottom trawling disturbance. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114, 8301–8306.
Kaiser M.J., Clarke K.R., Hinz H., Austen M. C.V., Somerfield P.J. & Karakassis I. (2006) Global analysis of response and recovery of benthic biota to fishing. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 311, 1–14.
Thrush S.F., Hewitt J.E., Cummings V.J., Dayton P.K., Cryer M., Turner S.J., Funnell G.A., Budd R.G., Milburn C.J. & Wilkinson M.R. (1998) Disturbance of the marine benthic habitat by commercial fishing: impacts at the scale of the fishery. Ecological Applications, 8, 866–879.

Key Messages:

Three studies examined the effects of ceasing or prohibiting commercial fishing on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations. Two studies were in the Tasman Sea (New Zealand), the third on Gorges Bank in the North Atlantic Ocean (USA).

 
COMMUNITY RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Overall community composition (1 study): One site comparison study in the Tasman Sea  found that an area closed to commercial trawling and dredging for 28 years had different overall invertebrate communities than an area subject to commercial fishing.
Overall species richness/diversity (1 study): One site comparison study on Georges Bank found no difference in invertebrate species richness between an area closed to commercial fishing for 10 to 14 years and a fished area.

POPULATION RESPONSE (3 STUDIES)

Overall abundance (2 studies): Two site comparison studies in the Tasman Sea  and on Georges Bank found that areas prohibiting commercial fishing for 10 to 14 years and 28 years had greater overall invertebrate abundance compared to areas where commercial fishing occurred. One of the studies  also found higher biomass, while the other found similar biomass in closed and fished areas.
Crustacean abundance (1 study): One replicated, site comparison study in the Tasman Sea found that in commercial fishing exclusion zones lobster abundance was not different to adjacent fished areas after up to two years.

OTHER (1 STUDY)

Overall community biological production (1 study): One site comparison study in the Tasman Sea  found that an area closed to commercial trawling and dredging for 28 years had greater biological production from invertebrates than an area where commercial fishing occurred.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
