155: Provide nest boxes for birds
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:
This intervention involves providing nest boxes for birds on farmland. Nest boxes can provide suitable habitats for hole-nesting birds where more natural nesting habitats such as tree cavities are scarce (Newton 1994). Nest boxes may consist of a wooden box with a circular (or other shaped) entrance hole and can be installed on poles or attached to trees.
See also ‘Provide owl nest boxes (Tawny owl, Barn owl)’ for studies looking at the effects of providing nest boxes for owls that commonly nest in farm buildings, such as barn owls or tawny owls.
Newton I. (1994) The role of nest sites in limiting the numbers of hole-nesting birds: a review. Biological Conservation, 70, 265-276.

Key Messages:

Two studies (including one before and after study) from the Netherlands and the UK found that following the provision of nest boxes there was an increase in the number of Eurasian kestrel clutches and breeding tree sparrows. One replicated study from Switzerland found the number of Eurasian wryneck broods in nest boxes declined over five years whilst the number of Eurasian hoopoe broods increased.
Eight studies from Finland, the Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland and the UK (six were replicated) found that nest boxes in agricultural habitats were occupied by Eurasian kestrel, long-eared owl, common starling, tits Parus spp., tree sparrow, stock dove and jackdaw, and Eurasian wryneck and Eurasian hoopoe. Whilst two studies from the UK (a replicated, paired site study and a controlled study) found that carrion crows did not nest in artificial trees and tree sparrows showed a preference for nest boxes in wetland habitat, compared to those in farmland sites.
Two replicated studies from Sweden found that nest success within boxes was related to the amount of pasture available and nest boxes positioned higher above the ground had higher occupancy, numbers of eggs and numbers of hatched young. 

 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Farmland Conservation
Description: Farmland Synopsis
