702: Maintain species-rich, semi-natural grassland
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Species-rich, semi-natural grasslands have declined drastically in Europe over the last 100 years (e.g. Poschlod & Bonn 1998, Eriksson et al. 2002) and conservation efforts have been directed to maintaining existing areas of these habitats. This section summarizes the results of studies that tested the effectiveness of interventions in maintaining the conservation value of species-rich grasslands, including hay meadows, litter meadows and other semi-natural pastures. The management regimes tested by these studies involve combinations of interventions, typically involving altered mowing or grazing regimes and reduced inputs, while some studies also tested the effectiveness of mulching or burning.

See also ‘Delay mowing or first grazing date on grasslands’ and ‘Reduce chemical inputs in grassland management’ for studies which tested the effectiveness of individual (uncombined) interventions in maintaining the conservation value of species-rich grassland.
Poschlod P. & Bonn S. (1998) Changing dispersal processes in the central European landscape since the last ice age: an explanation for the actual decrease of plant species richness in different habitats? Acta Botanica Neerlandica, 47, 27-44.
Eriksson O., Cousins S.A.O. & Bruun H.H. (2002) Land-use history and fragmentation of traditionally managed grasslands in Scandinavia. Journal of Vegetation Science, 13, 743-748


Key Messages:

Of 22 studies (including eleven replicated trials, three reviews and a systematic review) from the Czech Republic, Finland, Germany, Russia, Slovenia, Switzerland and the UK, 13 identified management regimes that maintained species-rich grassland. Four of these studies were replicated, controlled trials (including two randomized).
Nine studies (including two randomized, replicated before-and-after trials) from Switzerland and the UK examined the effectiveness of existing or historical agri-environment schemes: seven testing the effectiveness of the Environmentally Sensitive Areas scheme in England and two testing the effectiveness of the Ecological Compensation Areas scheme in Switzerland. All except one reported mixed results, with the schemes broadly maintaining plant species richness, but being less effective, for example, in enhancing species richness, preserving the highest quality sites, or overcoming the effects of past intensive management. One study found six Environmentally Sensitive Areas were of ‘outstanding’ significance for their lowland grassland, containing &gt;40% of the English resource of a grassland type. A replicated site comparison study found that on average 86% of Swiss Ecological Compensation Area litter meadows were of ‘good ecological quality’ compared with only 20% of hay meadow Ecological Compensation Areas.
Twelve studies (including a systematic review, six replicated trials of which two also controlled and randomized, and three reviews) from the Czech Republic, Finland, Germany, Slovenia, Switzerland and the UK tested the effects of management treatments on species richness or vegetation quality usually involving combinations of mowing, grazing or no fertilizer but some also tested the effectiveness of mulching or burning. All of these studies identified management treatments which benefited or maintained species richness or vegetation quality.


One site comparison from Finland and northwest Russia found that butterfly species richness, diversity and total abundance did not differ significantly between mown meadows and grazed pastures and that grassland age and origin had a greater impact on butterfly communities than present management.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Farmland Conservation
Description: Farmland Synopsis
