641: Provide 'sacrificial' grasslands to reduce the impact of wild geese on crops
Effectiveness rating: Unknown effectiveness
Background information and definitions:

There have been dramatic increases in many species of goose in recent decades (Madsen et al. 1999) and this has led to increasing conflict with farmers, as many species graze on arable land, potentially ruining crops. One potential solution, to reduce conflict whilst maintaining the populations of geese is to provide ‘sacrificial grasslands’ – areas set aside for geese to feed on, which keeps them away from agricultural fields.
To be useful, such areas need to be more attractive than neighbouring fields. Management to attract geese to these areas can include re-seeding grasslands with grass species or legumes such as clover Trifolium spp., or fertilizing grasslands to increase productivity so that these areas can support more birds.
Madsen J., Cracknell G. & Fox A.D. (1999) Goose Populations of the Western Palearctic. A Review of Status and Distribution. Wetlands International Publication No. 48. Wetlands International, Wageningen, The Netherlands.

 

Key Messages:

All six studies from the UK (including four replicated, controlled trials) found that managing grasslands for geese increased the number grazing there. Two replicated, controlled studies found that fertilized and cut areas were grazed by more white-fronted geese or brent geese than control areas. A replicated, controlled trial found that re-seeded and fertilized wet pasture fields were used by more barnacle geese than control fields, and that fertilized areas were used less than re-seeded ones. A replicated, controlled study found that spring fertilizer application increased the use of grassland fields by pink-footed geese. A replicated study found that plots sown with white clover were preferred by dark-bellied brent geese compared to plots sown with grasses.
However, four of the studies found that the birds were moving within a relatively small area (i.e. within the study site) and therefore the grasslands may not reduce conflict with farmers.

 

Synopsis Details:
Title: Farmland Conservation
Description: Farmland Synopsis
