2861: Use drugs to treat parasites
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
High parasite loads may reduce the fitness of marine and freshwater mammals and lead to higher levels of mortality (Aznar et al. 2001). Drugs are available to reduce the infestation levels of some parasites. Attempts to treat wild marine and freshwater mammals are most likely to be made when a species is highly threatened or when there are public health risks or economic costs associated with not treating. In such cases, mammals may be captured, treated, and released with the aim of improving the health of wild populations. For studies that treated mammals for parasites in captivity as part of a rehabilitation programme, see Rehabilitate and release injured, sick or weak marine and freshwater mammals.
Aznar F.J., Balbuena J.A., Fernández M. & Raga J.A. (2001) Living together: the parasites of marine mammals. Pages 385–423 in: Evans P. G. H. & Raga J. A. (eds.) Marine Mammals: Biology and Conservation. Springer US, Boston, MA.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects on marine mammals of using drugs to treat parasites. Both studies were in the North Pacific Ocean (USA).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Survival (2 studies): One of two controlled studies (including one before-and-after study) in the North Pacific Ocean found that treating northern fur seal pups with an anti-parasitic drug (ivermectin) reduced mortality rates. The other study found that Hawaiian monk seal pups treated with an anti-parasitic drug (praziquantel) had similar survival rates to untreated pups.
Condition (2 studies): One of two controlled studies (including one before-and-after study) in the North Pacific Ocean found that northern fur seal pups treated with an anti-parasitic drug (ivermectin) had reduced hookworm infections and greater growth rates than untreated pups. The other study found that Hawaiian monk seal pups treated with an anti-parasitic drug (praziquantel) had similar parasite loads to untreated pups.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
