2853: Limit, cease or prohibit ballast water exchange in specific areas
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Ballasting is the process by which sea water (ballast water) is discharged from a ship when at port or at sea. Ballast water can contain species from other locations taken up during water intake, which are then accidentally released in a new environment during de-ballasting (water release). Ballast water is one of the major processes of introduction of invasive or problematic species, including those that form harmful algal blooms (Barry et al. 2008, Molnar et al. 2008). Limiting, ceasing or prohibiting ballast water exchange in specific areas may help prevent the introduction, establishment and spread of invasive and problematic species. This may involve setting zones where ballasting is allowed, setting timings for ballasting when risk is reduced, or setting limits on the number of ships allowed to ballast in an area.
See also Treat ballast water before release.
Barry S.C., Hayes K.R., Hewitt C.L., Behrens H.L., Dragsund E. & Bakke S.M. (2008) Ballast water risk assessment: principles, processes, and methods. Ices Journal of Marine Science, 65, 121–131.
Molnar J.L., Gamboa R.L., Revenga C. & Spalding M.D. (2008) Assessing the global threat of invasive species to marine biodiversity. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 6, 485–492.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of limiting, ceasing or prohibiting ballast water exchange in specific areas on marine and freshwater mammal populations.

‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
