2892: Remove derelict fishing gear from mammals found entangled
Effectiveness rating: Beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Abandoned, lost or otherwise discarded fishing gear (or ‘ghost’ gear) is a major threat to marine and freshwater mammals. Mammals may become entangled in ‘ghost’ gear, such as nets, lines and ropes resulting in injury or death (Stelfox et al. 2016). Attempts may be made to remove derelict gear from mammals found entangled to improve survival. This may require specialist techniques, tools and training. Injuries or wounds caused by entanglement may also require treatment. Evidence is summarised below for studies that removed derelict gear from mammals in the wild. For studies that removed fishing gear from mammals in captivity as part of rehabilitation, see Rehabilitate and release injured, sick or weak marine and freshwater mammals.
Stelfox M., Hudgins J. & Sweet M. (2016) A review of ghost gear entanglement amongst marine mammals, reptiles and elasmobranchs. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 111, 6–17.

Key Messages:

Two studies evaluated the effects of removing derelict fishing gear from mammals found entangled. One study was in the North Pacific Ocean (USA) and one in the North Atlantic Ocean (USA).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (2 STUDIES)

Reproductive success (1 study): One review in the North Pacific Ocean found that after removing derelict fishing gear from Hawaiian monk seals, along with at least seven other interventions to enhance survival, more than a quarter of the seals reproduced.
Survival (2 studies): One review in the North Pacific Ocean found that removing derelict fishing gear from Hawaiian monk seals, along with at least seven other interventions to enhance survival, resulted in more than a quarter of the seals surviving. One review in the North Atlantic Ocean found that three common bottlenose dolphins survived for at least 1–4 years after they were disentangled from derelict fishing gear and released.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
