2929: Remove individual marine and freshwater mammals exhibiting aggressive behaviours that may limit population recovery
Effectiveness rating: Trade off between benefit and harms
Background information and definitions:
Individual marine and freshwater mammals may exhibit aggressive behaviours that may limit the recovery of threatened populations. For example, male Hawaiian monk seals Monachus schauinslandi may attack and injure adult females resulting in high levels of female mortality and reduced reproductive success (Hiruki 1993a). Pups of both sexes may also be injured and killed (Hiruki 1993b). Removing such individuals from colonies, e.g. by translocating them to other areas, may help threatened populations to recover. However, careful consideration must be given to appropriate release sites to ensure that the threat is not transferred to other colonies.
Hiruki L.M., Stirling I., Gilmartin W.G., Johanos T.C. & Becker B.L. (1993a) Significance of wounding to female reproductive success in Hawaiian monk seals (Monachus schauinslandi) at Laysan Island. Canadian Journal of Zoology, 71, 469–474.
Hiruki L.M., Gilmartin W.G., Becker B.L. & Stirling I. (1993b) Wounding in Hawaiian monk seals (Monachus schauinslandi). Canadian Journal of Zoology, 71, 458–468.

Key Messages:

One study evaluated the effects of removing individual marine mammals exhibiting aggressive behaviours that may limit population recovery. The study was in the North Pacific Ocean (USA).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (1 STUDY)

Survival (1 study): One before-and-after study in the North Pacific Ocean found that after removing aggressive male Hawaiian monk seals, the survival of adult female Hawaiian monk seals increased.
Condition (1 study): One before-and-after study in the North Pacific Ocean found that fewer female Hawaiian monk seals were injured after aggressive male Hawaiian monk seals were removed.

BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
