2838: Introduce and enforce regulations for marine and freshwater mammal watching tours
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Introducing regulations for marine and freshwater mammal watching tours may reduce disturbance. This may involve setting limits on approach distances, vessel speeds and manoeuvres, observation times, group sizes and number of visits (e.g. Notarbartolo di Sciara et al. 2009). Interactions with mammals during tours, such as feeding, touching, or swimming with mammals, may also be regulated (e.g. see Limit, cease or prohibit feeding of marine and freshwater mammals by tourists). Enforcement of regulations may be required if compliance is low (e.g. Whitt & Read 2006).
Notarbartolo di Sciara G., Hanafy M.H., Fouda M.M., Afifi A. & Costa M. (2009) Spinner dolphin (Stenella longirostris) resting habitat in Samadai Reef (Egypt, Red Sea) protected through tourism management. Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, 89, 211–216.
Whitt A.D. & Read A.J. (2006) Assessing compliance to guidelines by dolphin-watching operators in Clearwater, Florida, USA. Tourism in Marine Environments, 3, 117–130.

Key Messages:

Four studies evaluated the effects of introducing regulations for marine and freshwater mammal watching tours on marine mammals. One study was in each of the North Atlantic Ocean (the Azores), the Cananéia estuary (Brazil), the South Pacific Ocean (Australia) and the Bass Strait (Australia).

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (4 STUDIES)

Behaviour change (4 studies): Two controlled studies in the North Atlantic Ocean and South Pacific Ocean found that when whale-watching vessels followed approach regulations, fewer sperm whales and humpback whale pods changed their behaviours (e.g. swimming speed, aerial displays) or avoided the vessels compared to when regulations were not followed, but direction of movement and diving patterns or diving behaviours did not differ. One replicated, controlled study in the Cananéia estuary found that when tour boats followed approach regulations, fewer Guiana dolphins displayed negative behaviours (e.g. moving away, diving, groups separating). One study in the Bass Strait found that when boats approached a seal colony to 75 m, more seals remained on shore than when boats approached to 25 m.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
