2821: Use catch and hook protection devices on fishing gear
Effectiveness rating: Likely to be beneficial
Background information and definitions:
Catch and hook protection devices may be used to cover caught fish and hooks during hauling to reduce predation by marine and freshwater mammals and the subsequent capture of mammals. This may include ‘net sleeves’ which cover caught fish and hooks with the downward pressure of hauling, or triggered devices (e.g. chains, cages, cones etc.) that automatically release when a fish is hooked. This may prevent mammal injury or death due to hooking. A reduction in mammal predation on fish catches may also reduce human-wildlife conflict at wild fisheries. However, there are reports of automated protection devices failing to trigger or becoming tangled in fishing gear (Hamer et al. 2015, Rabearisoa et al. 2015).
Hamer D.J., Childerhouse S.J., McKinlay J.P., Double M.C. & Gales N.J. (2015) Two devices for mitigating odontocete bycatch and depredation at the hook in tropical pelagic longline fisheries. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 72, 1691–1705.
Rabearisoa N., Bach P. & Marsac F. (2015) Assessing interactions between dolphins and small pelagic fish on branchline to design a depredation mitigation device in pelagic longline fisheries. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 72, 1682–1690.

Key Messages:

Five studies evaluated the effects on marine mammals of using catch and hook protection devices on fishing gear. Two studies were in the South Pacific Ocean (Chile, Australia and Fiji), two were in the Indian Ocean (Seychelles, Madagascar) and one was in the Southwest Atlantic Ocean.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
POPULATION RESPONSE (0 STUDIES)
BEHAVIOUR (0 STUDIES)
OTHER (5 STUDIES)

Reduction in entanglements/unwanted catch (1 study): One study in the South Pacific Ocean found that using cage or chain devices on fishing hooks resulted in fewer unwanted catches of toothed whales.
Human-wildlife conflict (5 studies): Two of four studies (including three controlled and one before-and-after study) in the South Pacific Ocean, the Southwest Atlantic Ocean and the Indian Ocean found that net sleeves or cage and chain devices on fishing hooks reduced damage to fish catches by sperm whales, killer whales and toothed whales. The two other studies found that attaching ‘umbrella’ or ‘spider’ devices on fishing hooks did not reduce predation and/or damage to fish catches by sperm whales or toothed whales. One controlled study in the Indian Ocean found that attaching catch protection devices made from streamers to fishing lines reduced Indo-Pacific bottlenose and spinner dolphin predation on fish bait, but only during the first two trials.


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
