3375: Expose seeds to light before sowing
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Exposing seeds to light before planting can help to break seed dormancy and encourage germination. Seeds of some species (with physiological dormancy) must experience high temperatures before germinating, in order to break down chemicals that inhibit germination or stop the production of these chemicals. For other species (with physical dormancy), heat can increases the permeability of the seed coat to water and gases, which are essential for germination. For a database of seed dormancy class by species, see Baskin & Baskin (2014).
To be summarized as evidence for this action, studies must have explicitly compared the performance of treated and untreated seeds. Studies that simply report the performance of treated seeds are not summarized here. Studies do not have to be in flooded/saturated soils, as long as they involve wetland-characteristic species.
Related actions: Soak seeds before sowing (freshwater non-woody – brackish/saline non-woody – freshwater trees/shrubs – brackish/saline trees/shrubs);     Chill seeds before sowing (freshwater non-woody – brackish/saline non-woody – freshwater trees/shrubs – brackish/saline trees/shrubs);     Heat seeds before sowing (freshwater non-woody – brackish/saline non-woody – freshwater trees/shrubs – brackish/saline trees/shrubs);     Physically damage seeds before sowing (freshwater non-woody – brackish/saline non-woody – freshwater trees/shrubs – brackish/saline trees/shrubs);     Treat seeds with chemicals before sowing (freshwater non-woody – brackish/saline non-woody – freshwater trees/shrubs – brackish/saline trees/shrubs).
Baskin C.C. & Baskin J.M. (2014) Seeds: Ecology, Biogeography and Evolution of Dormancy and Germination, Second Edition. Academic Press.

Key Messages:
We found no studies that evaluated the effects – on emergent wetland plants – of exposing their seeds to light before sowing.
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
