2895: Remove litter from marine and freshwater environments
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Litter can enter marine and freshwater environments through a multitude of pathways, such as vessels, storms, beaches, fishing etc., and can accumulate and persist for long periods (Pham et al. 2014, Andrady 2015). Litter can negatively affect marine and freshwater mammals through entanglement, ingestion, and the introduction of chemical contaminants (Kühn et al. 2015). Removing litter from the environment may reduce the risk of harm to mammals. However, this would not address the source or cause of the threat and can only be considered a temporary measure. Litter removal from aquatic environments can also be challenging, especially in remote or inaccessible areas.
For an intervention related to recovering derelict fishing gear, see Recover lost or discarded fishing gear.
Andrady A.L. (2015) Persistence of plastic litter in the oceans. Pages 57-72 in: Bergmann M., Gutow L. & Klages M. (eds.) Marine Anthropogenic Litter. Springer International Publishing, Cham.
Kühn S., Bravo Rebolledo E.L. & van Franeker J.A. (2015) Deleterious effects of litter on marine life. Pages 75–116 in: Bergmann M., Gutow L. & Klages M. (eds.) Marine Anthropogenic Litter. Springer International Publishing, Cham.
Pham C.K., Ramirez-Llodra E., Alt C.H.S., Amaro T., Bergmann M., Canals M., Company J.B., Davies J., Duineveld G., Galgani F., Howell K.L., Huvenne V.A.I., Isidro E., Jones D.O.B., Lastras G., Morato T., Gomes-Pereira J.N., Purser A., Stewart H., Tojeira I., Tubau X., Van Rooij D. & Tyler P.A. (2014) Marine litter distribution and density in European seas, from the shelves to deep basins. PLOS ONE, 9, e95839.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of removing litter from marine and freshwater environments on marine and freshwater mammal populations.

‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
