1469: Encourage use of traditional hunting methods rather than using guns 
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
This intervention is based on the assumption that when indigenous people hunt with modern weapons (e.g. shotguns), their harvest is larger than when they hunt with traditional hunting gear (e.g. bow and arrow, blow-gun, spear). This has been shown for example for indigenous forest dwelling people in the Amazon (Alvard 1995) and in tropical rainforests of south-eastern Peru (Mena et al. 1999). Similarily, a ban on firearms after 1974 on Bioko Island, Equatorial Guinea, meant that by 1986 primates appeared to have increased in abundance and were recolonising some areas despite ongoing hunting for bushmeat using traps (Butynski & Koster, 1994). Based on this assumption the argument is that encouraging indigenous people to use traditional hunting methods rather than modern firearms will ultimately lead to a reduction in off-take rates and therefore more sustainable hunting practices.
 
Alvard M. (1995) Shotguns and sustainable hunting in the Neotropics. Oryx, 29, 58–66.
Butynski, T. M., & Koster, S. H. (1994). Distribution and conservation status of primates in Bioko Island, Equatorial Guinea. Biodiversity and Conservation, 3, 893-909.
Mena P., Stallings J.R., Regalado J. & Cueva R. (1999) The sustainability of current practices by the Huaorani. Pages 57-78 in J.G. Robinson & E.L. Bennett (eds.) Hunting for Sustainability in Tropical Forest, Columbia University Press, New York.

Key Messages:

We found no evidence for the effects of encouraging the use of traditional hunting methods rather than using guns on primate populations.

'No evidence' for an action means we have not yet found any studies that directly and quantitatively tested this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Primate Conservation
Description: Primate Synopsis
