2170: Genetically modify non-native, invasive or other problematic species
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Non-native, invasive and other problematic species can impact on native subtidal benthic invertebrate species through predation, competition for resources (food & space), contamination (for pathogens and diseases), or hybridization (through reproduction) (Molnar et al. 2008; Bishop et al. 2010). Some individuals of non-native, invasive or other problematic species could be genetically modified (for instance by introducing Trojan sex chromosomes) and introduced to the population to reduce their environmental tolerance, fitness or reproductive capacity (Allendorf & Lundquist 2003; Cotton & Wedekind 2007). This can potentially reduce their ability to hybridize with native species, but also reduce their population over time and with it the threats they pose to native species.
 
Allendorf F.W. & Lundquist L.L. (2003) Introduction: population biology, evolution, and control of invasive species. Conservation Biology, 17, 24–30.
Bishop M.J., Krassoi F.R., McPherson R.G., Brown K.R., Summerhayes S.A., Wilkie E.M. & O’Connor W.A. (2010) Change in wild-oyster assemblages of Port Stephens, NSW, Australia, since commencement of non-native Pacific oyster (Crassostrea gigas) aquaculture. Marine and Freshwater Research, 61, 714–723.
Cotton S. & Wedekind C. (2007) Control of introduced species using Trojan sex chromosomes. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 22, 441–443.
Molnar J.L., Gamboa R.L., Revenga C. & Spalding M.D. (2008) Assessing the global threat of invasive species to marine biodiversity. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 6, 485–492.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of genetically modifying non-native, invasive or other problematic species on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
