1562: Reduce noise pollution by restricting development activities to certain times of the day/night  
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Noise pollution is produced by motorized vehicles, trains and planes on and near transportation routes, resource extraction activities (i.e. mining, logging), motorized recreation (i.e. ‘driving-safaris’) and urban development. Noise pollution can cause hearing loss, elevated stress hormone levels, and hypertension in humans and other animals. This in turn, can affect animal foraging and anti-predator behaviour, reproductive success, population density and community structure (Barber et al. 2010). Therefore, this intervention restricts noise to only certain periods of the day to reduce the potential effect of noise pollution on the primate species of interest. For example, development activities may be limited to times of the day/night where the primate is active (depending on the species), so that it can rest during quiet time periods. Alternatively/additionally, it may be decided that development activities are prohibited during sensitive time periods, such as the mating season or hibernation, during which it is crucial that the species can vocalize effectively and efficiently and is not exposed to any additional stress factors.
 
Barber J.R., Crooks K.R. & Fristrup K.M. (2010) The costs of chronic noise exposure for terrestrial organisms. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 25, 180–189.

Key Messages:

We found no evidence for the effects of reducing noise pollution by restricting development activities to certain times of the day/night on primate populations.

'No evidence' for an action means we have not yet found any studies that directly and quantitatively tested this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Primate Conservation
Description: Primate Synopsis
