2172: Use biological control to manage non-native, invasive or other problematic species populations
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Non-native, invasive and other problematic species can impact on native subtidal benthic invertebrate species through predation, competition for resources (food & space), contamination (for pathogens and diseases), or hybridization (through reproduction) (Molnar et al. 2008; Bishop et al. 2010). Biological controls can be used to try to reduce the population of non-native, invasive or other problematic species (Fitridge et al. 2012; Thresher & Kuris 2004). Forms of biological controls include the release of native or non-native predators, parasites, or diseases likely to affect specific non-native, invasive or other problematic species. It should be kept in mind that using native species as biological controls is always a preferred safer option than using non-native ones (Thresher & Kuris 2004).
 
Bishop M.J., Krassoi F.R., McPherson R.G., Brown K.R., Summerhayes S.A., Wilkie E.M. & O’Connor W.A. (2010) Change in wild-oyster assemblages of Port Stephens, NSW, Australia, since commencement of non-native Pacific oyster (Crassostrea gigas) aquaculture. Marine and Freshwater Research, 61, 714–723.
Fitridge I., Dempster T., Guenther J. & de Nys R., (2012) The impact and control of biofouling in marine aquaculture: a review. Biofouling, 28, 649–669.
Molnar J.L., Gamboa R.L., Revenga C. & Spalding M.D. (2008) Assessing the global threat of invasive species to marine biodiversity. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 6, 485–492.
Thresher R., Grewe P., Patil J.G., Whyard S., Templeton C.M., Chaimongol A., Hardy C.M., Hinds L.A. & Dunham R. (2009) Development of repressible sterility to prevent the establishment of feral populations of exotic and genetically modified animals. Aquaculture, 290, 104–109.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of using biological control to manage non-native, invasive or other problematic species populations on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
