3025: Adopt ecotourism principles/create an ecotourism site
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Tourists may visit marshes and swamps for many reasons, from hiking to biking, skiing, viewing wild animals, photography and relaxation. Tourist visits could be managed with conservation or natural and cultural resources in mind: minimizing damage from tourist activities, educating both staff and visitors, and providing financial resources to conserve natural areas (Ramsar 2012; The International Ecotourism Society 2017). “Voluntourists” – who help with research or conservation activities as part of their tourist experience – can help to collect scientific data and provide a source of income. Ecotourism principles could be adopted by existing tourist sites, or new ecotourism sites could be created.
Ecotourism activities should be carried out sustainably, for example minimizing impact by trampling and employing biosecurity measures to prevent the introduction of non-native species. When developing a site aimed at foreign tourists, impacts on local communities should be considered.
To be summarized as evidence for this action, studies must have monitored vegetation within ecotourism sites, with a comparison to the situation before ecotourism principles were adopted or to sites not managed under ecotourism principles. This action does not include (a) studies that monitor plant populations or only within ecotourism sites, or (b) studies reporting visitor numbers, economic performance or perceived value of ecotourism sites.
Ramsar (2012) Ramsar (2012) Wetland Tourism: A Great Experience. Available at https://www.ramsar.org/sites/default/files/documents/library/ramsar-wwd2012-leaflet-en.pdf. Accessed 4 February 2020.
The International Ecotourism Society (2017) What is Ecotourism? Available at http://www.ecotourism.org/what-is-ecotourism. Accessed 1 August 2017.

Key Messages:
We found no studies that evaluated the effects, on marsh/swamp vegetation, of adopting ecotourism principles or creating an ecotourism site.
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
