3017: Use low-impact methods to hunt/collect animals
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
The impact of hunting/collecting animals from marshes or swamps could be reduced by switching to lower-impact methods or equipment. Accessing marshes or swamps by foot may cause less damage to vegetation than using vehicles. Canoes or hovercraft may cause less damage to vegetation than motorboats. In Brazilian mangroves, reverting to the traditional, manual braceamento technique to collect crabs may be less damaging than the fashionable, more profitable redinha technique – which involves cutting mangrove trees in order to set crab traps (do Nascimento et al. 2011; Walsh 2017).
To be included as evidence for this action, studies must have compared low- and high-impact hunting methods, not just reported the effects of methods claimed to be low-impact.
Related actions: Reduce frequency of hunting/collecting animals; Reduce intensity of hunting/collecting animals; Restrict vehicle use; Restrict pedestrian access.
do Nascimento D.M., da Silva Mourão J. & Alves R.R.N. (2011) A substituição das técnicas tradicionais de captura do caranguejo-uçá (Ucides cordatus) pela técnica “redinha” no estuário do rio Mamanguape, Paraíba. (The replacement of traditional capture techniques of caranguejo-uçá crabs (Ucides cordatus) by the redinha (little-net technique) in the Mamanguape River Estuary, Paraíba, Brazil). Sitientibus Série Ciências Biológicas, 11, 113–119.
Walsh K. (2017) Crabbing Gone Commercial: Brazilian Mangroves Threatened by Shift in Local Traditions. Available at https://news.mongabay.com/2017/05/crabbing-gone-commercial-brazilian-mangroves-threatened-by-shift-in-local-traditions/. Accessed 22 January 2020.

Key Messages:
We found no studies that evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of using supposedly low-impact methods to hunt/collect animals in marshes or swamps.
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
