3018: Reintroduce overharvested animals
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Reintroducing overharvested animals – to marshes or swamps or the wider landscape – could help to conserve marshes and swamps. Animals such as beavers Castor spp. can directly benefit marshes and swamps: these wetland habitats can develop around beaver ponds, or develop on abandoned beaver ponds as they fill in (Willby et al. 2018). Other animals might benefit marshes and swamps more indirectly. For example, after the re-introduction of grey wolves Canis lupus to Yellowstone National Park, USA in the mid-1990s, elk Cervus elaphus numbers declined (elk are prey for wolves), willow Salix spp. growth and recruitment improved (willow is eaten by elk) and beaver numbers increased (beavers use willows as food and to build dams) – with potential consequences on the number and type of wetlands present across the landscape (Wolf et al. 2007; Ripple & Beschta 2015).
Caution: Introducing animal species where they are not native can have undesirable consequences, on native competitors and the wider environment.
Related actions: Reduce frequency of hunting/collecting animals; Reduce intensity of hunting/collecting animals.
Ripple W.J. & Beschta R.L. (2015) Trophic cascades in Yellowstone: the first 15 years after wolf reintroduction. Biological Conservation, 145, 205–213.
Willby N.J., Law A., Levanoni O., Foster G. & Ecke F. (2018) Rewilding wetlands: beaver as agents of within-habitat heterogeneity and the responses of contrasting biota. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 373, 20170444.
Wolf E.C., Cooper D.J. & Hobbs N.T. (2007) Hydrologic regime and herbivory stabilize and alternative state in Yellowstone National Park. Ecological Applications, 17, 1572–1587.

Key Messages:
We found no studies that evaluated the effects, on marsh/swamp vegetation, of reintroducing overharvested animals.
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
