3532: Install and maintain anti-predator systems around aquaculture that prevent entanglement of reptiles
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Marine aquaculture (mariculture) includes the breeding, rearing, and harvesting of ocean-based aquatic plants and animals in ocean-based cages or spat lines. Marine aquaculture produces many of the shellfish (e.g. oysters, clams, mussels), prawn and shrimp, as well as salmon (Salmonidae spp.) and other marine fish consumed by humans. Leatherback turtles Dermochelys coriacea are known to have become entangled in mussel farm lines and spat lines in Canada resulting in fatalities and with the anchoring line of a mussel farm in the North Atlantic (Price et al. 2016). Lines made of stiff material have been proposed to prevent entanglement (Price & Morris 2013). Interventions to reduce bycatch in marine fishing nets are discussed in Threat: Biological resource use.
Freshwater aquaculture involves the breeding, rearing and harvesting of freshwater species in ponds. Freshwater aquaculture is used to produce commercial quantities of freshwater crayfish, prawns, turtles and fish (e.g. carp and trout). As with marine aquaculture, there is little documented evidence of how reptiles interact with these freshwater fish farms, although freshwater turtles undoubtedly compete with fish for food in these systems. Interventions to reduce bycatch in freshwater fishing nets are discussed in Threat: Biological resource use.
Price C.S. & Morris J.A. (2013) Marine cage culture and the environment: twenty-first century science informing a sustainable industry. NOAA Technical Memorandum NOS NCCOS 164.
Price C.S., Keane E., Morin D., Vaccaro C., Bean D. & Morris Jr J.A. (2016) Protected species and longline mussel aquaculture interactions. NOAA Technical Memorandum NOS NCCOS 211.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects on reptile populations of installing and maintaining anti-predator systems around aquaculture that prevent entanglement of reptiles.

‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
