1080: Brown and black bullheads: Using a combination of netting and electrofishing
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Applying a combination of netting and electrofishing may prove particularly effective in controlling populations of invasive bullheads. Two before-and-after studies from Australia (Pinto et al. 2005) and the UK (Copp et al. 2007), found that electrofishing and gill netting combined were effective at reducing carp Cyprinus carpio and topmouth gudgeon Pseudorasbora parva populations. A replicated, paired sites study in the USA demonstrated that gill netting and electrofishing reduced or eradicated non-native trout species and facilitated a partial reversal in decline of the yellow-legged frog Rana muscosa (Knapp et al. 2007).
Copp G.H., Wesley K.J., Verreycken H. & Russell I.C. (2007) When an ‘invasive’ fish species fails to invade! Example of the topmouth gudgeon Pseudorasbora parva. Aquatic Invasions, 2, 107-112.
Knapp R.A., Boiano D.M. & Vredenburg V.T. (2007) Removal of nonnative fish results in population expansion of a declining amphibian (mountain yellow-legged frog, Rana muscosa). Biological Conservation, 135, 11-20.
Pinto L., Chandrasena N., Pera J., Hawkins P., Eccles D. & Sim R. (2005) Managing invasive carp (Cyprinus carpio L.) for habitat enhancement at Botany Wetlands, Australia. Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems, 15, 447-462.

Key Messages:

No evidence was captured on the impact of electrofishing and gill netting combined on bullhead populations.

'No evidence' for an action means we have not yet found any studies that directly and quantitatively tested this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.
 
 

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species
Description: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species Synopsis
