2078: Limit the number and/or extent of, or prohibit additional, renewable energy installations in an area
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Renewable energy installations, such as marine wind farms, are becoming widespread in the marine environment (Boehlert & Gill 2010). However, their occurrence can negatively impact subtidal benthic invertebrates through direct physical damage when the infrastructure is constructed, changes in hydrology, and loss of habitat (from sedimentary grounds to hard surfaces) (Langhamer 2012). The number of renewable energy installations, or their spatial extent (area of seabed covered), could be limited in one area, for instance through the development of marine protected areas, bylaws, or other legislation. Doing so could limit the area impacted by renewable energy installations and the intensity of the pressure, thereby limiting the negative impacts on subtidal benthic invertebrates. Evidence for intervention related to marine spatial planning and co-location of activities are summarised under “Threat: Energy production and mining – Co-locate aquaculture systems with other activities and other infrastructures (such as wind farms) to maximise use of marine space”.
 
Boehlert G. & Gill A. (2010) Environmental and ecological effects of ocean renewable energy development: A current synthesis. Oceanography, 23, 68–81.
Langhamer O. (2012) Artificial reef effect in relation to offshore renewable energy conversion: State of the art. The Scientific World Journal.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of limiting the number and/or extent of, or prohibit additional, renewable energy installations in an area on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
