2208: Limit, cease or prohibit industrial and urban lighting at night
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Artificial lighting at night, including urban lighting from street lights and houses, industrial lighting from shops and offices, and underwater lighting in marinas and on pontoons, has recently been recognized as a cause for marine environmental concern (Davies et al. 2014). Light pollution has been shown to negatively affect the behaviour of several species, and the community composition of marine invertebrates (Davies et al. 2015; Navarro-Barranco & Hughes 2015). Limiting (in duration, intensity or spectral composition), ceasing or prohibiting lighting at night in an area may reduce the levels of light pollution affecting subtidal benthic invertebrates (Gaston et al. 2012).
 
Davies T.W., Coleman M., Griffith K.M. & Jenkins S.R. (2015) Night-time lighting alters the composition of marine epifaunal communities. Biology Letters, 11, 20150080.
Davies T.W., Duffy J.P., Bennie J. & Gaston K.J. (2014) The nature, extent, and ecological implications of marine light pollution. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 12, 347–355.
Gaston K.J., Davies T.W., Bennie J. & Hopkins J. (2012) Reducing the ecological consequences of night‐time light pollution: options and developments. Journal of Applied Ecology, 49, 1256–1266.
Navarro-Barranco C. & Hughes L.E. (2015) Effects of light pollution on the emergent fauna of shallow marine ecosystems: Amphipods as a case study. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 94, 235–240.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of limiting, ceasing or prohibiting industrial and urban lighting at night on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
