2209: Reduce underwater noise (other than sonar)
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Some subtidal benthic invertebrate species rely on sound to communicate, feed, navigate, detect predators, and reproduce (Popper & Hawkins 2012). Underwater noise, for instance from shipping, fishing, construction work, or aggregate extraction can mask the ambient soundscape and negatively affect subtidal benthic invertebrate species that rely on it (de Soto 2016; Pine et al. 2012; Popper & Hawkins 2012). Reducing underwater noise, for instance by limiting the level, intensity, and duration of specific noise-generating activities, or by using ‘technologies’ to dampen underwater noise emissions (such as bubble curtains, hydro-sound dampeners), may prevent the negative effects on subtidal benthic invertebrates.
Evidence for interventions related to noise pollution from sonars are summarised under “Threat: Pollution – Limit, cease or prohibit the use of sonars”.
 
de Soto N.A. (2016) Peer-reviewed studies on the effects of anthropogenic noise on marine invertebrates: from scallop larvae to giant squid. Pages 17–26 in: The Effects of Noise on Aquatic Life II. Springer, New York, NY.
Pine M.K., Andrew J.G. & Radford C.A.  (2012) Turbine sound may influence the metamorphosis behaviour of estuarine crab megalopae. PLoS One, 7, p. e51790
Popper A.N. & Hawkins A. (Eds.) (2012) The Effects of Noise on Aquatic Life, Springer Science + Business Media, LLC, New York

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of reducing underwater noise on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
