2272: Provide artificial shelters following release
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Many populations of marine subtidal benthic invertebrate species have declined or been depleted due to the multiple threats they are under, such as habitat loss and overharvest (Airoldi et al. 2008; Hobday et al. 2000). To counteract this phenomenon, captive-bred (or hatchery-reared) marine subtidal benthic invertebrates can be transplanted or released at a site, either to introduce a species to a new site (where they did not historically occur), to reintroduce a species to a site (where they used to occur), or to enhance the population at a site where the species is already present by increasing its abundance (Hansen & Gosselin 2013). To potentially increase the animals’ survival following transplant/release, some assistance can be provided, such as providing artificial shelters for the animals to avoid predation and settle into their new environment (Gutzler et al. 2015).
Related evidence is summarised under “Species management – Transplant/release captive-bred or hatchery-reared species”, “Transplant/release captive-bred or hatchery-reared species in predator exclusion cages”, “Translocate species”, and “Provide artificial shelters”.
 
Airoldi L., Balata D. & Beck M.W. (2008) The gray zone: relationships between habitat loss and marine diversity and their applications in conservation. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology, 366, 8–15.
Gutzler B.C., Butler M.J. & Behringer D.C. (2015) Casitas: A location-dependent ecological trap for juvenile Caribbean spiny lobsters, Panulirus argus. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 72, 177–184.
Hansen S.C. & Gosselin L.A. (2013) Do predators, handling stress or field acclimation periods influence the survivorship of hatchery-reared abalone Haliotis kamtschatkana outplanted into natural habitats? Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems, 23, 246–253.
Hobday A.J., Tegner M.J. & Haaker P.L. (2000) Over-exploitation of a broadcast spawning marine invertebrate: decline of the white abalone. Reviews in Fish Biology and Fisheries, 10, 493–514.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of providing artificial shelters following the release of species on their populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
