1522: Reduce primate predation by other primate species through exclusion (e.g. fences) or translocation
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
This intervention applies to primate species that are predated upon by other primate species, such as chimpanzees Pan troglodytes predating on colobus monkeys (Colobus spp.) (e.g. Boesch & Boesch 1989). Excluding these species by building predator-proof fences or translocating them elsewhere may benefit the conservation of the primate population this intervention is intended for. This is an invasive intervention and its usefulness should be carefully considered from an ethical perspective before implementing it.
            Controlling predation by non-primate species is discussed under ‘Reduce primate predation by non-primate species through exclusion (e.g. fences) or translocation’, controlling mammals that may alter the primate species’ habitat is discussed under ‘Control habitat-altering mammals (e.g. elephants) through exclusion (e.g. fences) or translocation’, and controlling competition for food with other species is discussed under ’Control inter-specific competition for food through exclusion (e.g. fences) or translocation’.
 
Boesch C. & Boesch H. (1989) Hunting behavior of wild chimpanzees in the Taï National Park. American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 78, 547–573.

Key Messages:

We found no evidence for the effects of reducing primate predation by other primate species through exclusion or translocation on primate populations.

'No evidence' for an action means we have not yet found any studies that directly and quantitatively tested this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Primate Conservation
Description: Primate Synopsis
