2280: Remove and relocate invertebrate species before onset of impactful activities
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Many populations of marine subtidal benthic invertebrate species have declined or been depleted due to the multiple threats they are under, including habitat damage or loss and direct physical damages from anthropogenic activities (Airoldi et al. 2008; Hobday et al. 2000). As a pre-emptive conservation measure, species can be temporarily removed to allow for an impactful activity to occur, then relocated back into their original location, or at a different location. Such measure has been trialled to preserve maërl (rhodolith) species and the habitat it forms during the dredging of new shipping channels (Sheehan et al. 2015; see “Habitat restoration and creation – Remove and relocate habitat-forming (biogenic) invertebrate species before onset of impactful activities”).
 
Airoldi L., Balata D. & Beck M.W. (2008) The gray zone: relationships between habitat loss and marine diversity and their applications in conservation. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology, 366, 8–15.
Hobday A.J., Tegner M.J. & Haaker P.L. (2000) Over-exploitation of a broadcast spawning marine invertebrate: decline of the white abalone. Reviews in Fish Biology and Fisheries, 10, 493–514.
Sheehan E.V., Bridger D., Cousens S.L. & Attrill M.J. (2015) Testing the resilience of dead maerl infaunal assemblage

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of removing and relocating invertebrate species before onset of impactful activities on their populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
