2220: Limit, cease or prohibit the degradation and/or removal of carbon sequestering species and/or habitats
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Anthropogenic climate change is driven by atmospheric gases, including carbon dioxides (IPCC 2013). Certain marine species and habitats, such as oyster reefs, coral reefs, seagrass beds and macroalgae forests, can act as sinks for the carbon dioxide that gets absorbed in seawater (Dehon 2010; Mcleod et al. 2011). However, many of these carbon-sequestrating species are vulnerable to climate change (Hoegh-Guldberg & Bruno 2010). Limiting, ceasing or prohibiting the degradation and/or removal of these carbon sequestering species and habitats may potentially benefit subtidal benthic invertebrates through improved resilience and reduction in carbon dioxide levels.
Evidence for other interventions related to carbon sequestration are summarised under “Threat: Climate change and severe weather – Promote natural carbon sequestration species and/or habitats”.
 
Dehon D.D. (2010) Investigating the use of bioengineered oyster reefs as a method of shoreline protection and carbon storage. Master’s Thesis. Louisiana State University, 1084.
Hoegh-Guldberg O. & Bruno J.F. (2010) The impact of climate change on the world’s marine ecosystems. Science, 328, 1523–1528.
IPCC (2013) Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex & P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.
Mcleod E., Chmura G.L., Bouillon S., Salm R., Björk M., Duarte C.M., Lovelock C.E., Schlesinger W.H. & Silliman B.R. (2011) A blueprint for blue carbon: toward an improved understanding of the role of vegetated coastal habitats in sequestering CO2. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 9, 552–560.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of limiting, ceasing or prohibiting the degradation and/or removal of carbon sequestering species and/or habitats on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
