1501: Provide domestic meat to workers of the logging company to reduce hunting
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Several studies have shown that bushmeat consumption is not solely taste-driven (e.g. Jenkins et al. 2011), but that other factors, such as price (Schenck et al. 2006) and availability (e.g. Fa et al. 2003) may play an important role in human meat choice. Because of this, it is believed that providing workers employed by the logging company with alternative domestic meat sources will reduce illegal hunting for bushmeat.
            Reducing the size of forestry teams in an effort to reduce human density-dependent threat levels to primates and their habitat, particularly poaching, is discussed under ‘Reduce the size of forestry teams to include employees only (not family members)’.
 
Fa J.E., Currie D. & Meeuwig J. (2003) Bushmeat and food security in the Congo Basin: linkages between wildlife and people’s future. Environmental Conservation, 30, 71–78.
Jenkins R.K.B., Keane A., Rakotoarivelo A.R., Rakotomboavonjy V., Randrianandrianina F.H., Razafimanahaka H.J., Ralaiarimalala S.R. & Jones J.P.G. (2011) Analysis of patterns of bushmeat consumption reveals extensive exploitation of protected species in eastern Madagascar. PLoS ONE, 6, e27570.
Schenck M., Nsame Effa E., Starkey M., Wilkie D., Abernethy K., Telfer P., Godoy R. & Treves A. (2006) Why people eat bushmeat: results from two-choice, taste tests in Gabon, Central Africa. Human Ecology, 34, 433–445.

Key Messages:

We found no evidence for the effects of providing domestic meat to workers of the logging company to reduce hunting on primate populations.

'No evidence' for an action means we have not yet found any studies that directly and quantitatively tested this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Primate Conservation
Description: Primate Synopsis
