1033: <i>Procambarus</i> crayfish control: Removal of food source 
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Crayfish are omnivores. Removing food items from their environment has the potential to reduce growth rates and survival and could lead to mortality. A replicated field study from California, USA (Pintor & Sih 2011), found that availability of prey, coupled with high levels of stream discharge limited the distribution of signal crayfish Pacifasticus lenuisculus at transect and stream scales, respectively.  A national study from the Czech Republic (Svobodová et al. 2012) found that invasive spiny-cheek crayfish Oronectes limosus were more commonly found in nutrient-enriched water while native species preferred water of a higher quality.  In addition, a replicated study in Japan (Kobayashi et al. 2011) identified that abundant leaf litter content in ponds led to higher densities of red swamp crayfish, due to them using it as a food source. It suggested restricting leaf litter within ponds would reduce crayfish population sizes.
Pintor L.M. & Sih A. (2011) Scale dependent effects of native prey diversity, prey biomass and natural disturbance on the invasion success of an exotic predator. Biological Invasions, 13, 1357–1366.
Svobodová J., Douda K., Štambergováb M., Rí Picek J., Vlach P. & Fischer D. (2012) The relationship between water quality and indigenous and alien crayfish distribution in the Czech Republic: patterns and conservation implications. Aquatic conservation: marine and freshwater ecosystems, 22, 776–786.
Kobayashi R., Maezono Y. & Miyashita T. (2011) The importance of allochthonous litter input on the biomass of an alien crayfish in farm ponds. Population Ecology, 53, 525-534.
 

Key Messages:

No evidence was captured on the effect of removing food sources as a control tool for Procambarus crayfish.

'No evidence' for an action means we have not yet found any studies that directly and quantitatively tested this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species
Description: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species Synopsis
