1575: Parrot’s feather: Manual harvesting (hand-weeding)
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Hand-harvesting is a time-consuming yet highly species-specific method for the control of invasive aquatic plants. It has been used for the management of some problematic species (e.g. Ludwigia peploides; Husser et al. 2016); however, since parrot’s feather is capable of reproducing through vegetative propagation this method might be problematic as any fragments that remain may form new stands of vegetation (Husser et al. 2017). Parrot’s feather control using mechanical harvesting is discussed under the intervention ‘Mechanical harvesting or cutting’ and the use of water jet ventilation and suction dredging are respectively discussed in ‘Removal using water jets’ and ‘Suction dredging and diver-assisted suction removal’. ‘Mechanical excavation’ discusses the control of parrot’s feather by means of mechanical digging.
Hussner A., Windhaus M. & Starfinger U. (2016) From weed biology to successful control: an example of successful management of Ludwigia grandiflora in Germany. Weed Research, 56, 434-441.
Hussner A., Stiers I., Verhofstad M.J.J.M., Bakker E.S., Grutters B.M.C., Haury J., van Valkenburg J.L.C.H., Brundu G., Newman J., Clayton J.S. & Anderson L.W.J. (2017) Management and control methods of invasive alien freshwater aquatic plants: A review. Aquatic Botany, 136, 112-137.

Key Messages:

We found no evidence on the effects of manual to control parrot’s feather.

'No evidence' for an action means we have not yet found any studies that directly and quantitatively tested this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species
Description: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species Synopsis
