2231: Designate a Marine Protected Area and prohibit static fishing gear
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Fishing can impact subtidal benthic invertebrates through species removal or habitat damage from fishing gear entering in contact with the seabed (Collie et al. 2000). Static fishing gear such as pots and traps, although usually considered less impactful than mobile gears, can be locally damaging to the seabed and subtidal benthic invertebrates directly located under or in their vicinity. Specific areas can be designated as protected, and specific management measures taken to control for static gear (Blyth et al. 2002). Inside protected areas where static gear is prohibited, the threat from these practices to subtidal benthic invertebrates is removed, and previously impacted populations are, in theory, able to recover over time (Blyth et al. 2004). However, species and populations are still subjected to the effects of other fishing activities allowed (for instance recreational fishing).
Evidence related to similar intervention outside of a protected area are summarised under “Threat: Biological resource use – Cease or prohibit static fishing gears”.
 
Blyth R.E., Kaiser M.J., Edwards-Jones G. & Hart P.J. B. (2004) Implications of a zoned fishery management system for marine benthic communities. Journal of Applied Ecology, 41, 951–961.
Blyth R.E., Kaiser M.J., Edwards-Jones G. & Hart P.J.B. (2002) Voluntary management in an inshore fishery has conservation benefits. Environmental Conservation, 29, 493–508.
Collie J.S., Hall S.J., Kaiser M.J. & Poiner I.R. (2000) A quantitative analysis of fishing impacts on shelf‐sea benthos. Journal of Animal Ecology, 69, 785–798.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of designating a Marine Protected Area and prohibiting static fishing gear on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
