3783: Relocate nests/eggs to a nearby natural setting (not including hatcheries): Crocodilians
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Reptile nests/eggs may be relocated away from specific threats (e.g. egg collecting, flooding, erosion, predation, or being crushed on roads) and reburied in an alternative suitable natural setting where the threat is lower or non-existent. Consideration must be given to the potential impacts of different environmental conditions in the destination location (for example temperature and humidity) on the sex, size, shape, colour, behaviour, movement ability and post-hatching growth of reptile hatchlings (Warner & Andrews 2002, Booth et al. 2006).
Due to the number of studies found, this action has been split by species group, though no studies were found for amphisbaenians. See here for: Sea turtles; Tortoises, terrapins, side-necked & softshell turtles; Snakes & lizards or Tuatara.
This action does not include studies on the effect of relocating nests/eggs to on-beach hatcheries, which are designated locations on a beach that are often fenced and patrolled, and where larger numbers of nests/eggs tend to be reburied at relatively high densities. Studies on the effect of moving eggs to on-beach hatcheries are discussed in Relocate nests/eggs to a hatchery.
For studies on the effect of relocating eggs into artificial settings, including in polystyrene boxes and other containers, see Relocate nests/eggs for artificial incubation.
Depending on the threat to nests, practitioners may consider other actions such as Threat: Invasive alien and other problematic species – Protect nests and nesting sites from predation and Threat: Biological resource use – Patrol or monitor nesting beaches.
See also: Alter incubation temperatures to achieve optimal/desired sex ratio.
Booth D.T. (2006) Influence of incubation temperature on hatchling phenotype in reptiles. Physiological and Biochemical Zoology, 79, 274–281.
Warner D.A. & Andrews R.M. (2002) Laboratory and field experiments identify sources of variation in phenotypes and survival of hatchling lizards. Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 76, 105–124.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of relocating nests/eggs to a nearby natural setting on crocodile populations.

‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Reptile Conservation
Description: Reptile synopsis
