3340: Use flotation devices to support planted vegetation
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Marsh and swamp plant species have varying tolerances to flooding (Banach et al. 2009). Plants could be introduced with flotation devices, to ensure they are not flooded too deeply during early growth but remain in contact with the ground when water levels are lower. For example, plants might be introduced within peat bags and/or with attached pool noodles (Dreschel et al. 2017). It will probably be necessary to tether the plants or flotation devices to hold them in place. Caution: It may be difficult to remove materials (e.g. plastics) used to construct flotation devices, leading to pollution of the conservation site (Dreschel et al. 2017).
We captured no direct quantitative comparisons of plant performance with and without successfully operating flotation devices. Dreschel et al. (2017) reported high survival rates and similar growth rates of saplings planted in peat bags with and without pool noodles, but did not clearly describe the effect of adding pool noodles (peat bags floated anyway) or include saplings planted directly into the marsh.
Banach K., Banach A.M., Lamers L.P.M., De Kroon H., Bennicelli R.P., Smits A.J.M. & Visser E.J.W. (2009) Differences in flooding tolerance between species from two wetland habitats with contrasting hydrology: implications for vegetation development in future floodwater retention areas. Annals of Botany, 103, 341–351.
Dreschel T.W., Cline E.A. & Hill S.D. (2017) Everglades tree island restoration: testing a simple tree planting technique patterned after a natural process. Restoration Ecology, 25, 696–704.

Key Messages:
We found no studies that evaluated the effects of using flotation devices to support emergent vegetation planted in wetlands.
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
