1047: American bullfrog control: Collection of egg clutches
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Depending on body size, a female bullfrog may deposit 1,000 to 40,000 eggs, which hatch in 3-5 days (Snow & Witmer 2010).  Removal of egg clutches offers a potential tool for reducing bullfrog populations (Guibert et al. 2010).  However, for bullfrogs and some other temperate frogs, incomplete removal of eggs or larvae can boost growth and survival of remaining individuals via strong density dependence (Adams & Pearl 2007).
Snow N.P. & Witmer G. (2010) American Bullfrogs as Invasive Species: A Review of the Introduction, Subsequent Problems, Management Options, and Future Directions. Proceedings Of the 24th Vertebrate Pest Conference (Timm, R.M. & Fagerstone, K.A. Eds.) Published at University of California, Davis, USA.
Guibert S., Dejean T. & Hippolyte S. (2010).  Le Parc naturel regional Périgord-Limousin: territoire d’expérimentation et d’innovation par la mise en place d’un programme d’éradication de la Grenouille taureau (Lithobates catesbeianus) associé à un programme de recherche sur les maladies émergentes des amphibiens.  EPOPS, 79, 15-24.
Adams M.J. & Pearl C.A. (2007) Problems and opportunities managing invasive bullfrogs: is there any hope? Pages 679–693 in: F. Gherardi (eds) Biological invaders in inland waters: profiles, distribution and threats, Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
 

Key Messages:

Despite reference to removal of egg clutches in some studies using bilge pumps or nets, no evidence was captured on the effects of egg collection on American bullfrogs.

'No evidence' for an action means we have not yet found any studies that directly and quantitatively tested this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.
 


 

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species
Description: Control of Freshwater Invasive Species Synopsis
