3389: Raise public awareness about marshes or swamps
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
This action involves educating the public about the importance of marshes and swamps, the threats they face and what can be done to protect them (Ramsar Convention on Wetlands 2018). Messages could be conveyed through information boards, talks, art projects, adverts, leaflets, celebrity endorsements, blogs, news articles, social media and videos (e.g. www.youtube.com/watch?v=v3GXlESxaR4). The aim is to change public attitudes and behaviour to benefit marshes and swamps: anything from encouraging people to use less water, to use environmentally-friendly cleaning products, to lobby governments to better protect marshes and swamps, or to take direct action to conserve these habitats. Note that the effects of these specific actions are considered elsewhere in the synopsis.
To be clear, studies would be summarized as evidence for this action if the awareness raising is substantially related to marshes and swamps, even if it involves other wetland habitats (e.g. peatlands), aquatic habitats (e.g. rivers and lakes) or upland habitats (e.g. forests).
Related actions: Engage local people in management/monitoring of marshes or swamps; Provide education/training programmes about marshes or swamps; Put up signs to discourage fires; Put up signs to discourage littering.
Ramsar Convention on Wetlands (2018) Global Wetland Outlook: State of the World’s Wetlands and their Services to People. Ramsar Convention Secretariat, Gland.

Key Messages:
We found no studies that evaluated the effects, on vegetation or human behaviour, of interventions to raise public awareness about marshes or swamps.
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
