3072: Reduce frequency of prescribed burning
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
This section considers the effects of different prescribed burning frequencies, when the lower intensity may be suitable to conserve marsh or swamp vegetation. Different plant species have differing tolerance to disturbance, so the frequency and intensity of disturbance can affect the plant community composition (Connell 1978).
To be summarized as evidence for this action, studies must have compared burning at different frequencies (e.g. 1 vs 2 burns/year) but with the same intensity and with at least some overlap in the timing of disturbance (e.g. summer vs summer + winter). For this action, “reduction” includes stopping disturbance altogether. However, studies comparing areas that remain unburned to areas that become burned, at any frequency, are not summarized as evidence for this action.
Related actions: Reduce intensity of prescribed burning;     Change season/timing of prescribed burning (freshwater marshes – brackish/salt marshes – freshwater swamps – brackish/saline swamps);     Use prescribed fire to maintain or restore disturbance (freshwater marshes – brackish/salt marshes – freshwater swamps – brackish/saline swamps);     Use prescribed fire to control problematic plants (freshwater marshes – brackish/salt marshes – freshwater swamps – brackish/saline swamps).
Connell, J.H. (1978) Diversity in tropical rain forests and coral reefs. Science, 199, 1302–1310.

Key Messages:
We found no studies that evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of reducing the frequency of prescribed burning in marshes or swamps (or burning them at different frequencies).
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
