3111: Use cutting to control problematic large trees/shrubs: brackish/saline swamps
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
This action involves cutting off above-ground parts of mature shrubs and trees: plants that are too large to mow. Note that vegetation may resprout from roots or stumps that are left in place. Cutting may be done manually or with machinery, depending on the species to be cut and the site conditions. Cuttings may be removed from the site, or left in place to rot down.
Locally, it may be desirable to remove all trees/shrubs from open marshes to prevent them from developing into swamps. However, note that encroachment of woody vegetation into marshes may be necessary for habitat migration and conservation of swamps at a regional or global scale (Saintilan et al. 2014). Within swamps, it may be desirable to remove individual trees/shrubs to maintain the vegetation structure or composition.
For this action, “vegetation” refers to overall or non-target vegetation. Studies that only report responses of target problematic plants have not been summarized.
Related actions: Cut/remove/thin forest plantations; Cut large trees/shrubs to maintain or restore disturbance; Physically remove problematic plants; Physically damage problematic plants, including by girdling large trees/shrubs.
Saintilan N., Wilson N.C., Rogers K., Rajkaran A., & Krauss K.W. (2014) Mangrove expansion and salt marsh decline at mangrove poleward limits. Global Change Biology, 20, 147–157.

Key Messages:
We found no studies that evaluated the effects, on vegetation, of cutting down problematic large trees/shrubs in brackish/saline swamps.
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
