2030: Retain remnant habitat patches
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Remnant patches of natural or semi-natural vegetation, such as forest and woodland, may provide important habitat for bats, particularly in disturbed or highly modified landscapes (e.g. Law et al. 1999, Saldana-Vazquez et al. 2013, De Torrez et al. 2018).
To be included as evidence for this intervention, studies must have monitored a comparison, i.e. compared remnant habitats that has been kept intact with similar/nearby areas where remnant habitats have been removed or otherwise degraded. There must have been an active decision (i.e. intervention) to retain the remnant habitats and the study must state when the intervention was carried out.
For studies that provide evidence for retaining remnant forest on agricultural land, see ‘Retain remnant forest or woodland on agricultural land’.
De Torrez E.C.B., Ober H.K. & McCleery R.A. (2018) Critically imperiled forest fragment supports bat diversity and activity within a subtropical grassland. Journal of Mammalogy, 99, 273–282.
Law B.S., Anderson J. & Chidel M. (1999) Bat communities in a fragmented forest landscape on the south-west slopes of New South Wales, Australia. Biological Conservation, 88, 333–345.
Saldana-Vazquez R.A., Castro-Luna A.A., Sandoval-Ruiz C.A., Hernandez-Montero J.R. & Stoner K.E. (2013) Population composition and ectoparasite prevalence on bats (Sturnira ludovici; Phyllostomidae) in forest fragments and coffee plantations of central Veracruz, Mexico. Biotropica, 45, 351–356.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of retaining remnant habitat patches on bat populations.

‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Bat Conservation
Description: Update 2020
