2757: Use remote tools to detect mammals in an area and allow vessel course or speed to be altered
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Using remote tools to alert vessel operators to marine and freshwater mammals within shipping lanes may allow avoidance measures to be taken reducing the risk of lethal collisions. Various technologies have been developed for this purpose including acoustic detection buoys (Van Parijs et al. 2009), software for vessels to report and receive real-time mammal sightings (e.g. ‘Real Time Plotting of Cetaceans’, Souffleurs d'Ecume 2012), and predictive tools (e.g. ‘WhaleWatch’, Hazen et al. 2017). Vessel operators may be alerted to mammal presence/sightings by radio (e.g. Automated Identification Systems), onboard software, or mobile phone apps (e.g. ‘Whale Alert’, Conserve.iO 2018).
See also Use observers on board vessels to detect mammals and allow vessel course or speed to be altered and Use real-time automated tools on board vessels to detect mammals and allow vessel course or speed to be altered.
Conserve.iO (2018) Conserve.iO. Technology for a better planet. Available at http://conserve.io/
Hazen E.L., Palacios D.M., Forney K.A., Howell E.A., Becker E., Hoover A.L., Irvine L., DeAngelis M., Bograd S.J., Mate B.R. & Bailey H. (2017) WhaleWatch: a dynamic management tool for predicting blue whale density in the California Current. Journal of Applied Ecology, 54, 1415–1428.
Souffleurs d'Ecume (2012) REPCET Real Time Plotting of Cetaceans. Available online at http://repcet.com
Van Parijs S.M., Clark C.W., Sousa-Lima R.S., Parks S.E., Rankin S., Risch D. & Van Opzeeland I.C. (2009) Management and research applications of real-time and archival passive acoustic sensors over varying temporal and spatial scales. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 395, 21–36.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of using remote tools to detect mammals in an area and allow vessel course or speed to be altered.

‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Conservation
Description: Marine and Freshwater Mammal Synopsis
