2205: Use biodegradable panels in fishing pots
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Fishing is an important source of marine litter (Matsuoka et al. 2005). Once in the marine environment, discarded or lost fishing gears, often referred to as ‘ghost fishing’ (Matsuoka et al. 2005), can accumulate and subsist for a long time due to very slow degradation. There, it can harm subtidal benthic invertebrates through physical damage, entanglement, smothering and habitat modification (Gilardi et al. 2010). Biodegradable panels can be used in fishing pots so that they degrade over time in the marine environment, without harmful effects (Bilkovic et al. 2012). By using biodegradable panels on fishing pots, the risk of subtidal benthic invertebrates getting caught in lost or discarded pots is potentially reduced, or if they are caught, they may be able to escape as the pots degrade.
Evidence for interventions related to pollution from fishing gear are summarised under “Threat: Pollution – Recover lost fishing gear”.
 
Bilkovic D.M., Havens K.J., Stanhope D.M. & Angstadt K.T. (2012) Use of fully biodegradable panels to reduce derelict pot threats to marine fauna. Conservation Biology, 26, 957–966.
Gilardi K.V., Carlson-Bremer D., June J.A., Antonelis K., Broadhurst G.,& Cowan T. (2010) Marine species mortality in derelict fishing nets in Puget Sound, WA and the cost/benefits of derelict net removal. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 60, 376–382.
Matsuoka T., Nakashima T. & Nagasawa N. (2005) A review of ghost fishing: scientific approaches to evaluation and solutions. Fisheries Science, 71, 691.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of using biodegradable panels in fishing pots on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
