2200: Establish aquaculture to extract the nutrients from run-offs
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Intensive agriculture constitutes an important source of pollution to the marine environment. Agriculture waste and pollutants can enter rivers and other watercourse runoffs and be discharged into the sea (Rawlings et al. 1998). For instance, wastewaters can introduce agrichemicals, bacteria, excess nutrients and solid particles, which negatively impact on subtidal benthic invertebrates (Rawlings et al. 1998). Some species can naturally improve water quality through feeding (for instance filter-feeding species such as mussels), or through photosynthesis (for instance algae species) (Chung et al. 2002). Establishing aquaculture systems near polluted areas from agriculture runoffs and wastewaters in order to extract nutrients may be an effective biological method of pollution removal (‘bioemediation’; Desilva et al. 2000), which may reduce pollution levels and allow subtidal benthic invertebrate communities to recover over time.
Evidence for other interventions related to pollution from agriculture are summarised under “Threat: Pollution – Regulate the use, dosage and disposal of agrichemicals”, “Treat wastewater from intensive livestock holdings”, and “Create artificial wetlands to reduce the amount of pollutants reaching the sea”.
 
Chung I.K., Kang Y.H., Yarish C., Kraemer G.P. & Lee J.A. (2002) Application of seaweed cultivation to the bioremediation of nutrient-rich effluent. Algae, 17, 187–194.
Desilva S., Ingram B.A., Gooley G.F. & McKinon L.J. (2000) Aquaculture-agriculture systems integration: an Australian perspective. Fisheries Management and Ecology.
Rawlins B.G., Ferguson A.J., Chilton P.J., Arthurton R.S., Rees J.G. & Baldock J.W. (1998) Review of agricultural pollution in the Caribbean with particular emphasis on small island developing states. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 36, 658–668.

Key Messages:

We found no studies that evaluated the effects of establishing aquaculture to extract the nutrients from run-offs on subtidal benthic invertebrate populations.

 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this intervention during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore, we have no evidence to indicate whether or not the intervention has any desirable or harmful effects.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Subtidal Benthic Invertebrate Conservation
Description: 
