2950: Retain/create habitat linkages in farmed areas
Effectiveness rating: No evidence found (no assessment)
Background information and definitions:
Isolated habitat patches can be linked with continuous habitat corridors, or with discrete habitat patches as stepping stones (Bennett 2003). Linkages could improve survival prospects and diversity of plant populations in habitat patches (Damschen et al. 2006), because seeds, pollen or vegetation fragments can be moved along them (e.g. by animals). Caution: Habitat linkages can also allow diseases, non-native species and fire to spread between patches (Resasco et al. 2014).
Studies of this action could involve linkages of any habitat type, as long as effects on marsh or swamp vegetation are evaluated.
Related actions: Retain/create habitat linkages in developed areas; Retain/create habitat linkages in areas of energy production or mining; Retain/create habitat linkages across service corridors.
Bennett, A.F. (2003). Linkages in the Landscape: The Role of Corridors and Connectivity in Wildlife Conservation. IUCN, Gland, Switzerland and Cambridge, UK.
Damschen E.I., Haddad N.M., Orrock J.L., Tewksbury J.J. & Levey D.J. (2006) Corridors increase plant species richness at large scales. Science, 313, 1284–1286.
Resasco J., Haddad N.M., Orrock J.L., Shoemaker D., Brudvig L., Damschen E.I., Tewksbury J.J. & Levy D.J. (2014) Landscape corridors can increase invasion by an exotic species and reduce diversity of native species. Ecology, 95, 2033–2039.

Key Messages:
We found no studies that evaluated the effects, on marsh/swamp vegetation, of retaining or creating habitat linkages in farmed areas.
 
‘We found no studies’ means that we have not yet found any studies that have directly evaluated this action during our systematic journal and report searches. Therefore we have been unable to assess whether or not the action is effective or has any harmful impacts. Please get in touch if you know of such a study for this action.

Supporting Evidence:


Synopsis Details:
Title: Marsh and Swamp Conservation
Description: Marsh and Swamp Synopsis
